---
short_name: prisoners-of-geography
author: Tim Marshall
format: 274 pages
identifier: URN:ISBN:978-1-78396-142-9
language: en
meta-json: {"rights":"All rights reserved","identifier":"URN:ISBN:978-1-78396-142-9","format":"274 pages","language":"en","author":"Tim Marshall","source":"URN:ISBN:978-1-78396-142-9","title":"Prisoners of Geography","type":"Text","publisher":"Elliott & Thompson"}
publisher: Elliott & Thompson
rights: All rights reserved
source: URN:ISBN:978-1-78396-142-9
title: Prisoners of Geography
name: Prisoners of Geography
tags: [geography, geopolitics]
type: Text
---

<span id="cover.html"></span>

![Illustration](media/prisoners-of-geography-assets/images/cover.jpg)

<span id="fm01.html"></span>

‘Marshall is not afraid to ask tough questions and provide sharp answers
… His approach is simple but effective. Ten chapters, each accompanied
by a map, cover the world’s regions and global powers. Each shows how
geography shapes not just history but destiny. In an ever more complex,
chaotic and interlinked world, *Prisoners of Geography* is a concise and
useful primer on geopolitics.’

– Adam LeBor, *Newsweek*

‘Sharp insights into the way geography shapes the choices of world
leaders.’

– Gideon Rachman, The World blog, [ft.com](http://ft.com)

‘An exceptional work, well-researched, argued and documented … a
treasure of information to satisfy the specialist researcher into
contemporary geopolitics and offers a riveting insight to the general
reader or student.… It is all covered in this magnificent book, which I
highly recommend.’

– Nehad Ismail, writer and broadcaster

‘There are few foreign correspondents in the current British media who
can present an overview of a political situation quite like Tim Marshall
… in *Prisoners of Geography* he presents this knowledge and experience
quite brilliantly. It’s a cleverly written book and underlines what
makes Tim Marshall such an effective voice on world affairs.’

– [retroculturati.com](http://retroculturati.com)

‘Marshall’s latest book explains how politics is nothing without
geography, in his crisp and compelling style … What he really excels at
is capturing the psychology of nations and giving maps a power that
politicians must tame.’

– Top Ten Holiday Reads, Dan Lewis, Stanfords,
[WorldTravelGuide.net](http://WorldTravelGuide.net)

‘Quite simply, one of the best books about geopolitics you could
imagine: reading it is like having a light shone on your understanding…
Marshall is clear-headed, lucid and possessed of an almost uncanny
ability to make the broad picture accessible and coherent … the book is,
in a way which astonished me, given the complexities of the subject,
unputdownable… I can’t think of another book that explains the world
situation so well.’

– Nicholas Lezard, *Evening Standard*

‘Crisply written and brilliantly argued.’

– Dame Ann Leslie

‘An essential and detailed reflection of the geopolitical dynamics that
exist globally.’

– Dr Sajjan M. Gohel

<span id="halftitle.html"></span>

<span id="halftitle.html#page_i"></span>PRISONERS

<small>OF</small> **GEOGRAPHY**

<span id="title.html"></span>

<span id="title.html#page_ii"></span><span
id="title.html#page_iii"></span>![illustration](media/prisoners-of-geography-assets/images/title.png)

<span id="contents.html"></span>

<span id="contents.html#page_v"></span>**CONTENTS** []
---------------------------------------------------

 

[Foreword *by Sir John Scarlett KCMG OBE*](#foreword.html)

[Introduction](#intro.html)

  [1 Russia](#chapter01.html)

  [2 China](#chapter02.html)

  [3 USA](#chapter03.html)

  [4 Western Europe](#chapter04.html)

  [5 Africa](#chapter05.html)

  [6 The Middle East](#chapter06.html)

  [7 India and Pakistan](#chapter07.html)

  [8 Korea and Japan](#chapter08.html)

  [9 Latin America](#chapter09.html)

[10 The Arctic](#chapter10.html)

[Conclusion](#conclu.html)

[Bibliography](#biblo.html)

[Acknowledgements](#ack.html)

[Index](#index.html)

<span id="foreword.html"></span>

<span id="foreword.html#page_vi"></span><span id="foreword.html#page_vii"></span>**FOREWORD** []
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

<span class="big">I</span><small>T HAS BECOME A TRUISM TO THINK, AND TO
SAY, THAT WE LIVE IN</small> exceptionally unstable times. The world, we
are told, has never been more unpredictable. Such statements invite a
cautious, even sceptical, response. It is right to be cautious. The
world has always been unstable and the future, by definition,
unpredictable. Our current worries could certainly be much worse. If
nothing else, the centenary of 1914 should have reminded us of that.

All that said, fundamental changes are certainly under way, and these
have real meaning for our own future and that of our children, wherever
we live. Economic, social and demographic change, all linked to rapid
technological change, have global implications which may mark out the
times we live in now from those that went before. This may be why we
talk so much about ‘exceptional uncertainty’ and why ‘geopolitical’
commentary has become a growth industry.

Tim Marshall is unusually well qualified, personally and professionally,
to contribute to this debate. He has participated directly in many of
the most dramatic developments of the past twenty-five years. As his
Introduction reminds us, he has been on the front line in the Balkans,
Afghanistan and Syria. He has seen how decisions and events,
international conflicts and civil wars, can only be understood by taking
full account of the hopes, fears and preconceptions formed by history
and <span id="foreword.html#page_viii"></span>how these in turn are
driven by the physical surroundings – the geography – in which
individuals, societies and countries have developed.

As a result, this book is full of well-judged insights of immediate
relevance to our security and well-being. What has influenced Russian
action in Ukraine? Did we (the West) fail to anticipate this? If so,
why? How far will Moscow push now? Does China at last feel secure within
what it sees as natural land borders, and how will this affect Beijing’s
approach to maritime power and the USA? What does this mean for other
countries in the region, including India and Japan? For over 200 years
the USA has benefited from highly favourable geographical circumstances
and natural resource endowment. Now it has unconventional oil and gas.
Will this affect its global policy? The USA has extraordinary power and
resilience, so why is there so much talk of US decline? Are the deeply
embedded divisions and emotions across North Africa, the Middle East and
South Asia intractable, or can we detect some hope for the future?
Finally, and maybe most importantly for our country, the United Kingdom,
which is one of the largest and most global economies: how is Europe
reacting to the uncertainties and conflicts nearby, and not so nearby?
As Tim points out, over the past seventy years (and especially since
1991) Europe has become accustomed to peace and prosperity. Are we at
risk now of taking this for granted? Do we still understand what is
going on around us?

If you want to think about these questions, read this book.

Sir John Scarlett KCMG OBE,  
Chief Secret Intelligence Service (MI6), 2004–2009

<span id="intro.html"></span>

<span id="intro.html#page_ix"></span>**INTRODUCTION** []
-----------------------------------------------------

 

<span class="big">V</span><small>LADIMIR PUTIN SAYS HE IS A RELIGIOUS
MAN, A GREAT</small> supporter of the Russian Orthodox Church. If so, he
may well go to bed each night, say his prayers and ask God: ‘Why didn’t
you put some mountains in Ukraine?’

If God had built mountains in Ukraine, then the great expanse of
flatland that is the North European Plain would not be such encouraging
territory from which to attack Russia repeatedly. As it is, Putin has no
choice: he must at least attempt to control the flatlands to the west.
So it is with all nations, big or small. The landscape imprisons their
leaders, giving them fewer choices and less room to manoeuvre than you
might think. This was true of the Athenian Empire, the Persians, the
Babylonians and before; it was true of every leader seeking high ground
from which to protect their tribe.

The land on which we live has always shaped us. It has shaped the wars,
the power, politics and social development of the peoples that now
inhabit nearly every part of the earth. Technology may seem to overcome
the distances between us in both mental and physical space, but it is
easy to forget that the land where we live, work and raise our children
is hugely important, and that the choices of those who lead the seven
billion inhabitants of this planet will to some degree always be shaped
by the rivers, mountains, deserts, lakes and seas that constrain us all
– as they always have.

<span id="intro.html#page_x"></span>Overall there is no one geographical
factor that is more important than any other. Mountains are no more
important than deserts, nor rivers than jungles. In different parts of
the planet, different geographical features are among the dominant
factors in determining what people can and cannot do.

Broadly speaking, geopolitics looks at the ways in which international
affairs can be understood through geographical factors; not just the
physical landscape – the natural barriers of mountains or connections of
river networks, for example – but also climate, demographics, cultural
regions and access to natural resources. Factors such as these can have
an important impact on many different aspects of our civilisation, from
political and military strategy to human social development, including
language, trade and religion.

The physical realities that underpin national and international politics
are too often disregarded both in writing about history and in
contemporary reporting of world affairs. Geography is clearly a
fundamental part of the ‘why’ as well as the ‘what’. It might not be
*the* determining factor, but it is certainly the most overlooked. Take,
for example, China and India: two massive countries with huge
populations that share a very long border but are not politically or
culturally aligned. It wouldn’t be surprising if these two giants had
fought each other in several wars, but in fact, apart from one
month-long battle in 1962, they never have. Why? Because between them is
the highest mountain range in the world, and it is practically
impossible to advance large military columns through or over the
Himalayas. As technology becomes more sophisticated, of course, ways are
emerging of overcoming this obstacle, but the physical barrier remains a
deterrent, and so both countries focus their foreign policy on other
regions while keeping a wary eye on each other.

Individual leaders, ideas, technology and other factors all play a role
in shaping events, but they are temporary. Each new generation will
<span id="intro.html#page_xi"></span>still face the physical
obstructions created by the Hindu Kush and the Himalayas; the challenges
created by the rainy season; and the disadvantages of limited access to
natural minerals or food sources.

I first became interested in this subject when covering the wars in the
Balkans in the 1990s. I watched close at hand as the leaders of various
peoples, be they Serbian, Croat or Bosniak, deliberately reminded their
‘tribes’ of the ancient divisions and, yes, ancient suspicions in a
region crowded with diversity. Once they had pulled the peoples apart,
it didn’t take much to then push them against each other.

The River Ibar in Kosovo is a prime example. Ottoman rule over Serbia
was cemented by the Battle of Kosovo Polje in 1389, fought near where
the Ibar flows through the city of Mitrovica. Over the following
centuries the Serb population began to withdraw behind the Ibar as
Muslim Albanians gradually descended from the mountainous Malesija
region into Kosovo, where they became a majority by the mid eighteenth
century.

Fast-forward to the twentieth century and there was still a clear
ethnic/religious division roughly marked by the river. Then in 1999,
battered by NATO from the air and the Kosovo Liberation Army on the
ground, the Yugoslav (Serbian) military retreated across the Ibar,
quickly followed by most of the remaining Serb population. The river
became the de facto border of what some countries now recognise as the
independent state of Kosovo.

Mitrovica was also where the advancing NATO ground forces came to a
halt. During the three-month war there had been veiled threats that NATO
intended to invade all of Serbia. In truth, the restraints of both
geography and politics meant the NATO leaders never really had that
option. Hungary had made it clear that it would not allow an invasion
from its territory, as it feared reprisals against the 350,000 ethnic
Hungarians in northern Serbia. The alternative was an invasion from the
south, which would have got them to the Ibar in double-quick time; but
NATO would then have faced the mountains above them.

<span id="intro.html#page_xii"></span>I was working with a team of Serbs
in Belgrade at the time and asked what would happen if NATO came: ‘We
will put our cameras down, Tim, and pick up guns,’ was the response.
They were liberal Serbs, good friends of mine and opposed to their
government, but they still pulled out the maps and showed me where the
Serbs would defend their territory in the mountains, and where NATO
would grind to a halt. It was some relief to be given a geography lesson
in why NATO’s choices were more limited than the Brussels PR machine
made public.

An understanding of how crucial the physical landscape was in reporting
news in the Balkans stood me in good stead in the years which followed.
For example, in 2001, a few weeks after 9/11, I saw a demonstration of
how, even with today’s modern technology, climate still dictates the
military possibilities of even the world’s most powerful armies. I was
in northern Afghanistan, having crossed the border river from Tajikistan
on a raft, in order to link up with the Northern Alliance (NA) troops
who were fighting the Taliban.

The American fighter jets and bombers were already overhead, pounding
Taliban and Al Qaeda positions on the cold, dusty plains and hills east
of Mazar-e-Sharif in order to pave the way for the advance on Kabul.
After a few weeks it was obvious that the NA were gearing up to move
south. And then the world changed colour.

The most intense sandstorm I have ever experienced blew in, turning
everything a mustard-yellow colour. Even the air around us seemed to be
this hue, thick as it was with sand particles. For thirty-six hours
nothing moved except the sand. At the height of the storm you couldn’t
see more than a few yards ahead of you, and the only thing clear was
that the advance would have to wait for the weather.

The Americans’ satellite technology, at the cutting edge of science, was
helpless, blind in the face of the climate of this wild land. Everyone,
from President Bush and the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the NA troops on
the ground, just had to wait. Then it rained, and the sand that had
settled <span id="intro.html#page_xiii"></span>on everything and
everyone turned into mud. The rain came down so hard that the baked-mud
huts we were living in looked as if they were melting. Again it was
clear that the move south was on hold until geography finished having
its say. The rules of geography, which Hannibal, Sun Tzu and Alexander
the Great all knew, still apply to today’s leaders.

More recently, in 2012, I was given another lesson in geostrategy: as
Syria descended into full-blown civil war, I was standing on a Syrian
hilltop, overlooking a valley south of the city of Hama, and saw a
hamlet burning in the distance. Syrian friends pointed out a much larger
village about a mile away, from where they said the attack had come.
They then explained that if one side could push enough people from the
other faction out of the valley, then the valley could be joined onto
other land that led to the country’s only motorway, and as such would be
useful in carving out a piece of contiguous viable territory which one
day could be used to create a mini-statelet if Syria could not be put
back together again. Where before I saw only a burning hamlet, I could
now see its strategic importance and understand how political realities
are shaped by the most basic physical realities.

Geopolitics affects every country, whether at war, as in the examples
above, or at peace. There will be instances in every region you can
name. In these pages I cannot explore each one: Canada, Australia and
Indonesia, among others, get no more than a brief mention, although a
whole book could be devoted to Australia alone and the ways in which its
geography has shaped its connections with other parts of the world, both
physically and culturally. Instead I have focused on the powers and
regions that best illustrate the key points of the book, covering the
legacy of geopolitics from the past (nation-forming); the most pressing
situations we face today (the troubles in Ukraine, the expanding
influence of China); and looking to the future (growing competition in
the Arctic).

In Russia we see the influence of the Arctic, and how its freezing
climate limits Russia’s ability to be a truly global power. In China we
see <span id="intro.html#page_xiv"></span>the limitations of power
without a global navy. The chapter on the USA illustrates how shrewd
decisions to expand its territory in key regions allowed it to achieve
its modern destiny as a two-ocean superpower. Europe shows us the value
of flat land and navigable rivers in connecting regions with each other
and producing a culture able to kick-start the modern world, while
Africa is a prime example of the effects of isolation.

The chapter on the Middle East demonstrates why drawing lines on maps
while disregarding the topography and, equally importantly, the
geographical cultures in a given area is a recipe for trouble. We will
continue to witness that trouble this century. The same theme surfaces
in the chapters on Africa and India/Pakistan. The colonial powers drew
artificial borders on paper, completely ignoring the physical realities
of the region. Violent attempts are now being made to redraw them; these
will continue for several years, after which the map of nation states
will no longer look as it does now.

Very different from the examples of Kosovo or Syria are Japan and Korea,
in that they are mostly ethnically homogeneous. But they have other
problems: Japan is an island nation devoid of natural resources while
the division of the Koreas is a problem still waiting to be solved.
Meanwhile, Latin America is an anomaly. In its far south it is so cut
off from the outside world that global trading is difficult, and its
internal geography is a barrier to creating a trading bloc as successful
as the EU.

Finally, we come to one of the most uninhabitable places on earth – the
Arctic. For most of history humans have ignored it, but in the twentieth
century we found energy there, and twenty-first-century diplomacy will
determine who owns – and sells – that resource.

Seeing geography as a decisive factor in the course of human history can
be construed as a bleak view of the world, which is why it is disliked
in some intellectual circles. It suggests that nature is more powerful
than man, and that we can only go so far in determining our own fate.
However, other factors clearly have an influence on events too. Any
<span id="intro.html#page_xv"></span>sensible person can see that modern
technology is now bending the iron rules of geography. It has found ways
over, under, or through some of the barriers. The Americans can now fly
a plane all the way from Missouri to Mosul on a bombing mission without
needing concrete along the way on which to refuel. That, along with
their partially self-sustaining great Aircraft Carrier Battle Groups,
means they no longer absolutely have to have an ally or a colony in
order to extend their global reach around the world. Of course, if they
*do* have an airbase on the island of Diego Garcia, or permanent access
to the port in Bahrain, then they have more options; but it is less
essential.

So air power has changed the rules, as in a different way has the
internet. But geography, and the history of how nations have established
themselves within that geography, remains crucial to our understanding
of the world today and our future.

The conflict in Iraq and Syria is rooted in colonial powers ignoring the
rules of geography, whereas the Chinese occupation of Tibet is rooted in
obeying them; America’s global foreign policy is dictated by them, and
even the technological genius and power projection of the last
superpower standing can only mitigate the rules that nature, or God,
handed down.

What are those rules? The place to begin is in the land where power is
hard to defend, and so for centuries its leaders have compensated by
pushing outwards. It is the land without mountains to its west:
Russia.<span id="intro.html#page_xvi"></span>

<span id="chapter01.html"></span>

<span id="chapter01.html#page_1"></span>CHAPTER 1 []
-------------------------------------------------

**RUSSIA** []
----------

 

*Vast (adjective; vaster, vastest): of very great area or extent;
immense*.

<span id="chapter01.html#page_2"></span><span
id="chapter01.html#page_3"></span>![illustration](media/prisoners-of-geography-assets/images/f0002-01.png)

 

<span id="chapter01.html#page_4"></span><span
class="big">R</span><small>USSIA IS VAST. IT IS VASTEST. IMMENSE. IT IS
SIX MILLION SQUARE</small> miles vast, eleven time zones vast; it is the
largest country in the world.

Its forests, lakes, rivers, frozen tundra, steppe, taiga and mountains
are all vast. This size has long seeped into our collective
consciousness. Wherever we are, there is Russia, perhaps to our east, or
west, to our north or south – but there is the Russian Bear.

It is no coincidence that the bear is the symbol of this immense size.
There it sits, sometimes hibernating, sometimes growling, majestic, but
ferocious. Bear is a Russian word, but the Russians are also wary of
calling this animal by its name, fearful of conjuring up its darker
side. They call it *medved*, ‘the one who likes honey’.

At least 120,000 of these *medveds* live in a country which bestrides
Europe and Asia. To the west of the Ural Mountains is European Russia.
To their east is Siberia, stretching all the way to the Bering Sea and
the Pacific Ocean. Even in the twenty-first century, to cross it by
train takes six days. Russia’s leaders must look across these distances,
and differences, and formulate policy accordingly; for several centuries
now they have looked in all directions, but concentrated mostly
westward.

When writers seek to get to the heart of the bear they often use Winston
Churchill’s famous observation of Russia, made in 1939: ‘It is a riddle
wrapped in a mystery inside an enigma’, but few go on to complete the
sentence, which ends, ‘but perhaps there is a key. That key is Russian
national interest.’ Seven years later he used that key to unlock his
version of the answer to the riddle, asserting, ‘I am convinced that
<span id="chapter01.html#page_5"></span>there is nothing they admire so
much as strength, and there is nothing for which they have less respect
than for weakness, especially military weakness.’

He could have been talking about the current Russian leadership, which
despite being now wrapped in the cloak of democracy, remains
authoritarian in its nature with national interest still at its core.

When Vladimir Putin isn’t thinking about God, and mountains, he’s
thinking about pizza. In particular, the shape of a slice of pizza – a
wedge.

The thin end of this wedge is Poland. Here, the vast North European
Plain stretching from France to the Urals (which extend 1,000 miles
south to north, forming a natural boundary between Europe and Asia) is
only 300 miles wide. It runs from the Baltic Sea in the north to the
Carpathian Mountains in the south. The North European Plain encompasses
all of western and northern France, Belgium, the Netherlands, northern
Germany and nearly all of Poland.

From a Russian perspective this is a double-edged sword. Poland
represents a relatively narrow corridor into which Russia could drive
its armed forces if necessary and thus prevent an enemy from advancing
towards Moscow. But from this point the wedge begins to broaden; by the
time you get to Russia’s borders it is over 2,000 miles wide, and is
flat all the way to Moscow and beyond. Even with a large army you would
be hard-pressed to defend in strength along this line. However, Russia
has never been conquered from this direction partially due to its
strategic depth. By the time an army approaches Moscow it already has
unsustainably long supply lines, a mistake that Napoleon made in 1812,
and that Hitler repeated in 1941.

Likewise, in the Russian Far East it is geography that protects Russia.
It is difficult to move an army from Asia up into Asian Russia; there’s
not much to attack except for snow, and you could only get as far as the
Urals. You would then end up holding a massive piece of territory, in
<span id="chapter01.html#page_6"></span>difficult conditions, with long
supply lines and the ever-present risk of a counter-attack.

You might think that no one is intent on invading Russia, but that is
not how the Russians see it, and with good reason. In the past 500 years
they have been invaded several times from the west. The Poles came
across the North European Plain in 1605, followed by the Swedes under
Charles XII in 1708, the French under Napoleon in 1812, and the Germans
twice, in both world wars, in 1914 and 1941. Looking at it another way,
if you count from Napoleon’s invasion of 1812, but this time include the
Crimean War of 1853–6 and the two world wars up to 1945, then the
Russians were fighting on average in or around the North European Plain
once every thirty-three years.

At the end of the Second World War in 1945, the Russians occupied the
territory conquered from Germany in Central and Eastern Europe, some of
which then became part of the USSR, as it increasingly began to resemble
the old Russian Empire. In 1949 the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) was formed by an association of European and North American
states, for the defence of Europe and the North Atlantic against the
danger of Soviet aggression. In response, most of the Communist states
of Europe – under Russian leadership – formed the Warsaw Pact in 1955, a
treaty for military defence and mutual aid. The Pact was supposed to be
made of iron, but with hindsight by the early 1980s was rusting, and
after the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 it crumbled to dust.

President Putin is no fan of the last Soviet President, Mikhail
Gorbachev. He blames him for undermining Russian security and has
referred to the break-up of the former Soviet Union during the 1990s as
‘a major geopolitical disaster of the century’.

Since then the Russians have watched anxiously as NATO has crept
steadily closer, incorporating countries which Russia claims it was
promised would not be joining: the Czech Republic, Hungary and Poland in
<span id="chapter01.html#page_7"></span>1999, Bulgaria, Estonia, Latvia,
Lithuania, Romania and Slovakia in 2004 and Albania in 2009. NATO says
no such assurances were given.

Russia, like all great powers, is thinking in terms of the next 100
years and understands that in that time anything could happen. A century
ago, who could have guessed that American armed forces would be
stationed a few hundred miles from Moscow in Poland and the Baltic
States? By 2004, just fifteen years from 1989, every single former
Warsaw Pact state bar Russia was in NATO or the European Union.

The Moscow administration’s mind has been concentrated by that, and by
Russia’s history.

Russia as a concept dates back to the ninth century and a loose
federation of East Slavic tribes known as Kievan Rus’, which was based
in Kiev and other towns along the Dnieper River, in what is now Ukraine.
The Mongols, expanding their empire, continually attacked the region
from the south and east, eventually overrunning it in the thirteenth
century. The fledgling Russia then relocated north-east in and around
the city of Moscow. This early Russia, known as the Grand Principality
of Muscovy, was indefensible. There were no mountains, no deserts and
few rivers. In all directions lay flatland, and across the steppe to the
south and east were the Mongols. The invader could advance at a place of
his choosing, and there were few natural defensive positions to occupy.

Enter Ivan the Terrible, the first Tsar. He put into practice the
concept of attack as defence – i.e., beginning your expansion by
consolidating at home and then moving outwards. This led to greatness.
Here was a man to give support to the theory that individuals can change
history. Without his character of both utter ruthlessness and vision,
Russian history would be different.

The fledgling Russia had begun a moderate expansion under Ivan’s
grandfather, Ivan the Great, but that expansion accelerated after the
younger Ivan came to power in 1533. It encroached east on the Urals,
south to the Caspian Sea and north towards the Arctic Circle. It gained
<span id="chapter01.html#page_8"></span>access to the Caspian, and later
the Black Sea, thus taking advantage of the Caucasus Mountains as a
partial barrier between it and the Mongols. A military base was built in
Chechnya to deter any would-be attackers, be they the Mongol Golden
Hordes, the Ottoman Empire or the Persians.

There were setbacks, but over the next century Russia would push past
the Urals and edge into Siberia, eventually incorporating all the land
to the Pacific coast far to the east.

Now the Russians had a partial buffer zone and a hinterland – strategic
depth – somewhere to fall back to in the case of invasion. No one was
going to attack them in force from the Arctic Sea, nor fight their way
over the Urals to get to them. Their land was becoming what we know now
as Russia, and to get to it from the south or south-east you had to have
a huge army, a very long supply line, and fight your way past defensive
positions.

In the eighteenth century, Russia – under Peter the Great, who founded
the Russian Empire in 1721, and then Empress Catherine the Great –
looked westward, expanding the Empire to become one of the great powers
of Europe, driven chiefly by trade and nationalism. A more secure and
powerful Russia was now able to occupy Ukraine and reach the Carpathian
Mountains. It took over most of what we now know as the Baltic States –
Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia. Thus it was protected from any incursion
via land that way, or from the Baltic Sea.

Now there was a huge ring around Moscow which was the heart of the
country. Starting at the Arctic, it came down through the Baltic region,
across Ukraine, then the Carpathians, the Black Sea, the Caucasus and
the Caspian, swinging back round to the Urals, which stretched up to the
Arctic Circle.

In the twentieth century Communist Russia created the Soviet Union.
Behind the rhetoric of ‘Workers of the World Unite’, the USSR was simply
the Russian Empire writ large. After the Second World War it stretched
from the Pacific to Berlin, from the Arctic to the borders <span
id="chapter01.html#page_9"></span>of Afghanistan – a superpower
economically, politically and militarily, rivalled only by the USA.

Russia is the biggest country in the world, twice the size of the USA or
China, five times the size of India, twenty-five times the size of the
UK. However, it has a relatively small population of about 144 million,
fewer people than Nigeria or Pakistan. Its agricultural growing season
is short and it struggles to adequately distribute what is grown around
the eleven time zones which Moscow governs.

Russia, up to the Urals, is a European power in so far as it borders the
European land mass, but it is not an Asian power despite bordering
Kazakhstan, Mongolia, China and North Korea, and having maritime borders
with several countries including Japan and the USA.

Former US Vice Presidential candidate Sarah Palin was mocked when she
was reported as saying, ‘You can actually see Russia from land here in
Alaska’, a line which morphed in media coverage to ‘I can see Russia
from my house.’ What she really said was, ‘You can see Russia from land
here in Alaska, from an island in Alaska.’ She was right. A Russian
island in the Bering Strait is two and a half miles from an American
island in the Strait, Little Diomede Island, and can be seen with the
naked eye. You can indeed see Russia from America.

High up in the Urals there is a cross marking the place where Europe
stops and Asia starts. When the skies are clear it is a beautiful spot
and you can see through the fir trees for miles towards the east. In
winter it is snow-covered, as is the Siberian Plain you see below you
stretching towards the city of Yekaterinburg. Tourists like to visit to
put one foot in Europe and one in Asia. It is a reminder of just how big
Russia is when you realise that the cross is placed merely a quarter of
the way into the country. You may have travelled 1,500 miles from St
Petersburg, through western Russia, to get to the Urals, but you still
have another 4,500 miles to go before reaching the Bering Strait, and a
possible sighting of Mrs Palin, across from Alaska in the USA.

<span id="chapter01.html#page_10"></span>Shortly after the fall of the
Soviet Union I was in the Urals, at the point where Europe becomes Asia,
accompanied by a Russian camera crew. The cameraman was a taciturn,
stoic, grizzled veteran of filming, and was the son of the Red Army
cameraman who had filmed a great deal of footage during the German siege
of Stalingrad. I asked him, ‘So, are you European or are you Asian?’ He
reflected on this for a few seconds, then replied, ‘Neither – I am
Russian.’

Whatever its European credentials, Russia is not an Asian power for many
reasons. Although 75 per cent of its territory is in Asia, only 22 per
cent of its population lives there. Siberia may be Russia’s ‘treasure
chest’, containing the majority of the mineral wealth, oil, and gas, but
it is a harsh land, freezing for months on end, with vast forests
(taiga), poor soil for farming and large stretches of swampland. Only
two railway networks run west to east – the Trans-Siberian and the
Baikal–Amur Mainline. There are few transport routes leading north to
south and so no easy way for Russia to project power southward into
modern Mongolia or China: it lacks the manpower and supply lines to do
so.

China may well eventually control parts of Siberia in the long-term
future, but this would be through Russia’s declining birth rate and
Chinese immigration moving north. Already, as far west as the swampy
West Siberian Plain, between the Urals in the west and the Yenisei River
1,000 miles to the east, you can see Chinese restaurants in most of the
towns and cities. Many more different businesses are coming. The empty
depopulating spaces of Russia’s Far East are even more likely to come
under Chinese cultural, and eventually political, control.

When you move outside of the Russian heartland, much of the population
in the Russian Federation is not ethnically Russian and pays little
allegiance to Moscow, which results in an aggressive security system
similar to the one in Soviet days. During that era Russia was
effectively a colonial power ruling over nations and people who felt
they had nothing in common with their masters; parts of the Russian
Federation – for example, <span
id="chapter01.html#page_11"></span>Chechnya and Dagestan in the Caucasus
– still feel the same way.

Late in the last century, overstretch, spending more money than was
available, the economics of the madhouse in a land not designed for
people, and defeat in the mountains of Afghanistan all led to the fall
of the USSR. The Russian Empire shrank back to the shape of more or less
the pre-Communist era with its European borders ending at Estonia,
Latvia, Belarus, Ukraine, Georgia and Azerbaijan. The Soviet invasion of
Afghanistan in 1979, in support of the Communist Afghan government
against anti-Communist Muslim guerrillas, had never been about bringing
the joys of Marxist-Leninism to the Afghan people. It was always about
ensuring that Moscow controlled the space to prevent anyone else from
doing so.

Crucially, the invasion of Afghanistan also gave hope to the great
Russian dream of its army being able to ‘wash their boots in the warm
waters of the Indian ocean’, in the words of the ultra-nationalistic
Russian politician Vladimir Zhirinovsky, and thus achieve what it never
had: a warm-water port where the water does not freeze in winter, with
free access to the world’s major trading routes. The ports on the
Arctic, such as Murmansk, freeze for several months each year:
Vladivostok, the largest Russian port on the Pacific Ocean, is
ice-locked for about four months and is enclosed by the Sea of Japan,
which is dominated by the Japanese. This does not just halt the flow of
trade; it prevents the Russian fleet from operating as a global power.
In addition, water-borne transport is much cheaper than land or airborne
routes.

This lack of a warm-water port with direct access to the oceans has
always been Russia’s Achilles heel, as strategically important to it as
the North European Plain. Russia is at a geographical disadvantage,
saved from being a much weaker power only because of its oil and gas. No
wonder, in his will of 1725, that Peter the Great advised his
descendants to ‘approach as near as possible to Constantinople and
India. Whoever <span id="chapter01.html#page_12"></span>governs there
will be the true sovereign of the world. Consequently, excite continual
wars, not only in Turkey, but in Persia … Penetrate as far as the
Persian Gulf, advance as far as India.’

When the Soviet Union broke apart, it split into fifteen countries.
Geography had its revenge on the ideology of the Soviets and a more
logical picture reappeared on the map, one in which mountains, rivers,
lakes and seas delineate where people live, are separated from each
other and thus how they develop different languages and customs. The
exceptions to this rule are the ‘Stans’, such as Tajikistan, whose
borders were deliberately drawn by Stalin so as to weaken each state by
ensuring it had large minorities of people from other states.

If you take the long view of history – and most diplomats and military
planners do – then there is still everything to play for in each of the
states which formerly made up the USSR, plus some of those previously in
the Warsaw Pact military alliance. They can be divided three ways: those
that are neutral, the pro-Western group and the pro-Russian camp.

The neutral countries – Uzbekistan, Azerbaijan and Turkmenistan – are
those with fewer reasons to ally themselves with Russia or the West.
This is because all three produce their own energy and are not beholden
to either side for their security or trade.

In the pro-Russian camp are Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Belarus
and Armenia. Their economies are tied to Russia in the way that much of
eastern Ukraine’s economy is (another reason for the rebellion there).
The largest of these, Kazakhstan, leans towards Russia diplomatically
and its large Russian-minority population is well integrated. Of the
five, Kazakhstan and Belarus have joined Russia in the new Eurasian
Union (a sort of poor man’s EU) and all are in a military alliance with
Russia called the Collective Security Treaty Organization. The CSTO
suffers from not having a name you can boil down to one word, and from
being a watered-down Warsaw Bloc. Russia maintains a military presence
in Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Armenia.

<span id="chapter01.html#page_13"></span>Then there are the pro-Western
countries formerly in the Warsaw Pact but now all in NATO and/or the EU:
Poland, Latvia, Lithuania, Estonia, the Czech Republic, Bulgaria,
Hungary, Slovakia, Albania and Romania. By no coincidence, many are
among the states which suffered most under Soviet tyranny. Add to these
Georgia, Ukraine and Moldova, which would all like to join both
organisations but are being held at arm’s length because of their
geographic proximity to Russia and because all three have Russian troops
or pro-Russian militia on their soil. NATO membership of any of these
three could spark a war.

All of the above explains why, in 2013, as the political battle for the
direction of Ukraine heated up, Moscow concentrated hard.

As long as a pro-Russian government held sway in Kiev, the Russians
could be confident that its buffer zone would remain intact and guard
the North European Plain. Even a studiedly neutral Ukraine, which would
promise not to join the EU or NATO and to uphold the lease Russia had on
the warm-water port at Sevastopol in Crimea, would be acceptable. That
Ukraine was reliant on Russia for energy also made its increasingly
neutral stance acceptable, albeit irritating. But a pro-Western Ukraine
with ambitions to join the two great Western alliances, and which threw
into doubt Russia’s access to its Black Sea port? A Ukraine that one day
might even host a NATO naval base? That could not stand.

President Viktor Yanukovych of Ukraine tried to play both sides. He
flirted with the West, but paid homage to Moscow – thus Putin tolerated
him. When he came close to signing a massive trade agreement with the
EU, one which could lead to membership, Putin began turning the screw.

For the Russian foreign policy elite, membership of the EU is simply a
stalking horse for membership of NATO, and for Russia, Ukrainian
membership of NATO is a red line. Putin piled the pressure on
Yanukovych, made him an offer he chose not to refuse, and the Ukrainian
president scrambled out of the EU deal and made a pact with Moscow, thus
sparking the protests which were eventually to overthrow him.

<span id="chapter01.html#page_14"></span>The Germans and Americans had
backed the opposition parties, with Berlin in particular seeing former
world boxing champion turned politician Vitaly Klitschko as their man.
The West was pulling Ukraine intellectually and economically towards it
whilst helping pro-Western Ukrainians to push it westward by training
and funding some of the democratic opposition groups.

Street fighting erupted in Kiev and demonstrations across the country
grew. In the east, crowds came out in support of the President, while in
the west of the country, in cities such as L’viv (which used to be in
Poland), they were busy trying to rid themselves of any pro-Russian
influence.

By mid-February 2014 L’viv and other urban areas were no longer
controlled by the government. Then on 22 February, after dozens of
deaths in Kiev, the President, fearing for his life, fled. Anti-Russian
factions, some of which were pro-Western and some pro-fascist, took over
the government. From that moment the die was cast. President Putin did
not have much of a choice – he had to annex Crimea, which contained not
only many Russian-speaking Ukrainians but, most importantly, the port of
Sevastopol.

Sevastopol is Russia’s only true major warm-water port. However, access
out of the Black Sea into the Mediterranean is restricted by the
Montreux Convention of 1936, which gave Turkey – now a NATO member –
control of the Bosporus. Russian naval ships do transit the strait, but
in limited numbers, and this would not be permitted in the event of
conflict. Even after crossing the Bosporus the Russians need to navigate
the Aegean Sea before accessing the Mediterranean, and would still have
either to cross the Gibraltar Straits to gain access to the Atlantic
Ocean, or be allowed down the Suez Canal to reach the Indian Ocean.

The Russians do have a small naval presence in Tartus on Syria’s
Mediterranean coast (this partially explains their support for the
Syrian government when fighting broke out in 2011), but it is a limited
supply and replenishment base, not a major force.

<span id="chapter01.html#page_15"></span>Another strategic problem is
that in the event of war the Russian navy cannot get out of the Baltic
Sea either, due to the Skagerrak Strait, which connects to the North
Sea. The narrow strait is controlled by NATO members Denmark and Norway;
and even if the ships made it, the route to the Atlantic goes through
what is known as the GIUK gap (Greenland/Iceland/UK) in the North Sea –
which we will see more of when we look at Western Europe.

Having annexed Crimea, the Russians are wasting no time. They are
building up the Black Sea fleet at Sevastopol and constructing a new
naval port in the Russian city of Novorossiysk which, although it does
not have a natural deep harbour, will give the Russians extra capacity.
Eighty new ships are being commissioned, as well as several submarines.
The fleet will still not be strong enough to break out of the Black Sea
during wartime, but its capacity is increasing.

To counter this, in the next decade we can expect to see the USA
encouraging its NATO partner Romania to boost its fleet in the Black Sea
whilst relying on Turkey to hold the line across the Bosporus.

Crimea was part of Russia for two centuries before being transferred to
the Soviet Republic of Ukraine in 1954 by President Khrushchev at a time
when it was envisaged that Soviet man would live forever and so be
controlled by Moscow for ever. Now that Ukraine was no longer Soviet, or
even pro-Russian, Putin knew the situation had to change. Did the
Western diplomats know? If they didn’t, then they were unaware of Rule
A, Lesson One, in ‘Diplomacy for Beginners’: when faced with what is
considered an existential threat, a great power will use force. If they
were aware, then they must have considered Putin’s annexation of Crimea
a price worth paying for pulling Ukraine into modern Europe and the
Western sphere of influence.

A generous view is that the USA and the Europeans were looking forward
to welcoming Ukraine into the democratic world as a full member of its
liberal institutions and the rule of law, and that there wasn’t <span
id="chapter01.html#page_16"></span>much Moscow could do about it. That
is a view which does not take into account the fact that geopolitics
still exists in the twenty-first century, or that Russia does not play
by the rule of law.

Flushed with victory, the new interim Ukrainian government had
immediately made some foolish statements, not least of which was the
intention to abolish Russian as the official second language in various
regions. Given that these regions were the ones with the most Russian
speakers and pro-Russian sentiment, and indeed included Crimea, this was
bound to spark a backlash. It also gave President Putin the propaganda
he needed to make the case that ethnic Russians inside Ukraine needed to
be protected.

The Kremlin has a law which compels the government to protect ‘ethnic
Russians’. A definition of that term is, by design, hard to come by
because it will be defined as Russia chooses in each of the potential
crises which may erupt in the former Soviet Union. When it suits the
Kremlin, ethnic Russians will be defined simply as people who speak
Russian as their first language. At other times the new citizenship law
will be used, which states that if your grandparents lived in Russia,
and Russian is your native language, you can take Russian citizenship.
Given that, as the crises arise, people will be inclined to accept
Russian passports to hedge their bets, this will be a lever for Russian
entry into a conflict.

Approximately 60 per cent of Crimea’s population is ‘ethnically
Russian’, so the Kremlin was pushing against an open door. Putin helped
the anti-Kiev demonstrations, and stirred up so much trouble that
eventually he ‘had’ to send his troops out of the confines of the naval
base and onto the streets to protect people. The Ukrainian military in
the area was in no shape to take on both the people and the Russian
army, and swiftly withdrew. Crimea was once again de facto a part of
Russia.

You could make the argument that President Putin did have a choice: he
could have respected the territorial integrity of Ukraine. But, given
that he was dealing with the geographic hand God has dealt Russia, this
<span id="chapter01.html#page_17"></span>was never really an option. He
would not be the man who ‘lost Crimea’, and with it the only proper
warm-water port his country had access to.

No one rode to the rescue of Ukraine as it lost territory equivalent to
the size of Belgium, or the US state of Maryland. Ukraine and its
neighbours knew a geographic truth: that unless you are in NATO, Moscow
is near, Washington DC is far away. For Russia this was an existential
matter: they could not cope with losing Crimea, the West could.

The EU imposed limited sanctions – limited because several European
countries, Germany among them, are reliant on Russian energy to heat
their homes in winter. The pipelines run east to west and the Kremlin
can turn the taps on and off.

Energy as political power will be deployed time and again in the coming
years, and the concept of ‘ethnic Russians’ will be used to justify
whatever moves Russia makes.

In a speech in 2014 President Putin briefly referred to ‘Novorossiya’ or
‘New Russia’. The Kremlin-watchers took a deep breath. He had revived
the geographic title given to what is now southern and eastern Ukraine,
which Russia had won from the Ottoman Empire during the reign of
Catherine the Great in the late eighteenth century. Catherine went on to
settle Russians in these regions and demanded that Russian be the first
language. ‘Novorossiya’ was only ceded to the newly formed Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic in 1922. ‘Why?’ asked Putin rhetorically, ‘Let
God judge them.’ In his speech he listed the Ukrainian regions of
Kharkiv, Luhansk, Donetsk, Kherson, Mykolaiv and Odessa before saying,
‘Russia lost these territories for various reasons, but the people
remained.’

Several million ethnic Russians still remain inside what was the USSR,
but outside Russia.

It is no surprise that, after seizing Crimea, Russia went on to
encourage the uprisings by pro-Russians in the Ukrainian eastern
industrial heartlands in Luhansk and Donetsk. Russia could easily drive
militarily <span id="chapter01.html#page_18"></span>all the way to the
eastern bank of the Dnieper River in Kiev. But it does not need the
headache that would bring. It is far less painful, and cheaper, to
encourage unrest in the eastern borders of Ukraine and remind Kiev who
controls energy supplies, to ensure that Kiev’s infatuation with the
flirtatious West does not turn into a marriage consummated in the
chambers of the EU or NATO.

Covert support for the uprisings in eastern Ukraine was also
logistically simple and had the added benefit of deniability on the
international stage. Barefaced lying in the great chamber of the UN
Security Council is simple if your opponent does not have concrete proof
of your actions and, more importantly, doesn’t want concrete proof in
case he or she has to do something about it. Many politicians in the
West breathed a sigh of relief and muttered quietly, ‘Thank goodness
Ukraine isn’t in NATO or we would have had to act.’

The annexation of Crimea showed how Russia is prepared for military
action to defend what it sees as its interests in what it calls its
‘near abroad’. It took a rational gamble that outside powers would not
intervene, and Crimea was ‘doable’. It is close to Russia, could be
supplied across the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov, and could rely on
internal support from large sections of the population of the peninsula.

Russia has not finished with Ukraine yet, nor elsewhere. Unless it feels
threatened Russia will probably not send its troops all the way into the
Baltic States, or any further forward than it already is in Georgia; but
it will push its power in Georgia, and in this volatile period further
military action cannot be ruled out.

However, just as Russia’s actions in its war with Georgia in 2008 were a
warning to NATO to come no closer, so NATO’s message to Russia in the
summer of 2014 was, ‘This far west and no further.’ A handful of NATO
war planes were flown to the Baltic States, military exercises were
announced in Poland and the Americans began planning to ‘preposition’
extra hardware as close to Russia as possible. At the same time <span
id="chapter01.html#page_19"></span>there was a flurry of diplomatic
visits by Defence and Foreign Ministers to the Baltic States, Georgia
and Moldova to reassure them of support.

Some commentators poured scorn on the reaction, arguing that six RAF
Eurofighter Typhoon jets flying over Baltic airspace were hardly going
to deter the Russian hordes. But the reaction was about diplomatic
signalling, and the signal was clear – NATO is prepared to fight. Indeed
it would have to, because if it failed to react to an attack on a member
state, it would instantly be obsolete. The Americans – who are already
edging towards a new foreign policy in which they feel less constrained
by existing structures and are prepared to forge new ones as they
perceive the need arises – are deeply unimpressed with the European
countries’ commitment to defence spending.

In the case of the three Baltic States, NATO’s position is clear. As
they are all members of the alliance, armed aggression against any of
them by Russia would trigger Article 5 of NATO’s founding charter, which
states: ‘An armed attack against one or more \[NATO member states\] in
Europe or North America shall be considered an attack against them all’,
and goes on to say NATO will come to the rescue if necessary. Article 5
was invoked after the terrorist attacks in the USA on 11 September 2001,
paving the way for NATO involvement in Afghanistan.

President Putin is a student of history. He appears to have learnt the
lessons of the Soviet years, in which Russia overstretched itself and
was forced to contract. An overt assault on the Baltic States would
likewise be overstretching and is unlikely, especially if NATO and its
political masters ensure that Putin understands their signals.

Russia does not have to send an armoured division into Latvia, Lithuania
or Estonia to influence events there, but if it ever does it would
justify the action by claiming that the large Russian communities there
are being discriminated against. In both Estonia and Latvia
approximately one in four people are ethnically Russian and in Lithuania
it is 5.8 per cent. In Estonia the Russian speakers say they are
under-represented in <span id="chapter01.html#page_20"></span>government
and thousands do not have any form of citizenship. This does not mean
they want to be part of Russia, but they are one of the levers Russia
can pull to influence events.

The Russian-speaking populations in the Baltics can be stirred up to
making life difficult. There are existing, fully formed political
parties already representing many of them. Russia also controls the
central heating in the homes of the Baltic people. It can set the price
people pay for their heating bills each month, and, if it chooses,
simply turn the heating off.

Russia will continue to push its interests in the Baltic States. They
are one of the weak links in its defence since the collapse of the USSR,
another breach in the wall they would prefer to see forming an arc from
the Baltic Sea, south, then south-east connecting to the Urals.

This brings us to another gap in the wall and another region Moscow
views as a potential buffer state. Firmly in the Kremlin’s sights is
Moldova.

Moldova presents a different problem for all sides. An attack on the
country by Russia would necessitate crossing through Ukraine, over the
Dnieper River and then over another sovereign border into Moldova. It
could be done – at the cost of significant loss of life and by using
Odessa as a staging post – but there would no deniability. Although it
might not trigger war with NATO (Moldova is not a member), it would
provoke sanctions against Moscow at a level hitherto unseen, and confirm
what this writer believes to already be the case – that the cooling
relationship between Russia and the West is already the New Cold War.

Why would the Russians want Moldova? Because as the Carpathian Mountains
curve round south-west to become the Transylvanian Alps, to the
south-east is a plain leading down to the Black Sea. That plain can also
be thought of as a flat corridor into Russia; and, just as the Russians
would prefer to control the North European Plain at its narrow point in
Poland, so they would like to control the plain by the Black Sea – also
known as Moldova – in the region formerly known as Bessarabia.

<span
id="chapter01.html#page_21"></span>![illustration](media/prisoners-of-geography-assets/images/f0021-01.png)

A number of countries that were once members of the Soviet Union aspire
to closer ties with Europe, but with certain regions, such as
Transnistria in Moldova, remaining heavily pro-Russian, there is
potential for future conflict.

After the Crimean War (fought between Russia and Western European allies
to protect Ottoman Turkey from Russia), the 1856 Treaty of Paris
returned parts of Bessarabia to Moldova, thus cutting Russia off from
the River Danube. It took Russia almost a century to regain access to
it, but with the collapse of the USSR, once more Russia had to retreat
eastward.

However, in effect the Russians do already control part of Moldova – a
region called Transnistria, part of Moldova east of the Dniester River
which borders Ukraine. Stalin, in his wisdom, settled large numbers of
Russians there, just as he had in Crimea after deporting much of the
Tatar population.

Modern Transnistria is now at least 50 per cent Russian- or
Ukrainian-speaking, and that part of the population is pro-Russian.
<span id="chapter01.html#page_22"></span>When Moldova became independent
in 1991 the Russian-speaking population rebelled and, after a brief
period of fighting, declared a breakaway Republic of Transnistria. It
helped that Russia had soldiers stationed there, and it retains a force
of 2,000 troops to this day.

A Russian military advance in Moldova is unlikely, but the Kremlin can
and does use its economic muscle and the volatile situation in
Transnistria to try and influence the Moldovan government not to join
the EU or NATO.

Moldova is reliant on Russia for its energy needs, its crops go eastward
and Russian imports of the excellent Moldovan wine tend to rise or fall
according to the state of the relationship between the two countries.

Across the Black Sea from Moldova lies another wine-producing nation:
Georgia. It is not high on Russia’s list of places to control for two
reasons. Firstly the Georgia–Russian war of 2008 left large parts of the
country occupied by Russian troops, who now fully control the regions of
Abkhazia and South Ossetia. Secondly, it lies south of the Caucasus
Mountains and Russia also has troops stationed in neighbouring Armenia.
Moscow would prefer an extra layer to their buffer zone, but can live
without taking the rest of Georgia. That situation could potentially
change if Georgia looked close to becoming a NATO member. This is
precisely why it has so far been rebuffed by the NATO governments, which
are keen to avoid the inevitable conflict with Russia.

A majority of the population in Georgia would like closer ties with the
EU countries, but the shock of the 2008 war, when then President Mikheil
Saakashvili naively thought the Americans might ride to his rescue after
he provoked the Russians, has caused many to consider that hedging their
bets may be safer. In 2013 they elected a government and president,
Giorgi Margvelashvili, far more conciliatory to Moscow. As in Ukraine,
people instinctively know the truism everyone in the neighbourhood
recognises: that Washington is far away, and Moscow is near.

<span id="chapter01.html#page_23"></span>Russia’s most powerful weapons
now, leaving to one side nuclear missiles, are not the Russian army and
air force, but gas and oil. Russia is second only to the USA as the
world’s biggest supplier of natural gas, and of course it uses this
power to its advantage. The better your relations with Russia, the less
you pay for energy; for example, Finland gets a better deal than the
Baltic States. This policy has been used so aggressively, and Russia has
such a hold over Europe’s energy needs, that moves are afoot to blunt
its impact. Many countries in Europe are attempting to wean themselves
off their dependency on Russian energy, not via alternative pipelines
from less aggressive countries but by building ports.

On average, more than 25 per cent of Europe’s gas and oil comes from
Russia; but often the closer a country is to Moscow, the greater its
dependency. This in turn reduces that country’s foreign policy options.
Latvia, Slovakia, Finland and Estonia are 100 per cent reliant on
Russian gas, the Czech Republic, Bulgaria and Lithuania are 80 per cent
dependent, and Greece, Austria and Hungary 60 per cent. About half of
Germany’s gas consumption comes from Russia which, along with extensive
trade deals, is partly why German politicians tend to be slower to
criticise the Kremlin for aggressive behaviour than a country such as
Britain, which not only has 13 per cent dependency, but also has its own
gas-producing industry, including reserves of up to nine months’ supply.

There are several major pipeline routes running east to west out of
Russia, some for oil and some for gas. It is the gas lines which are the
most important.

In the north, via the Baltic Sea, is the Nord Stream route, which
connects directly to Germany. Below that, cutting through Belarus, is
the Yamal pipeline, which feeds Poland and Germany. In the south is the
Blue Stream, taking gas to Turkey via the Black Sea. Until early 2015
there was a planned project called South Stream, which was due to use
the same route but branch off to Hungary, Austria, Serbia, Bulgaria and
Italy. South Stream was Russia’s attempt to ensure that even during
<span id="chapter01.html#page_24"></span>disputes with Ukraine it would
still have a major route to large markets in Western Europe and the
Balkans. Several EU countries put pressure on their neighbours to reject
the plan, and Bulgaria effectively pulled the plug on the project by
saying the pipelines would not come across its territory. President
Putin reacted by reaching out to Turkey with a new proposal, sometimes
known as Turk Stream.

Russia’s South Stream and Turk Stream projects to circumvent Ukraine
followed the price disputes between the two states of 2005–10, which at
various times cut the gas supply to eighteen countries. European nations
which stood to benefit from South Stream were markedly more restrained
in their criticism of Russia during the Crimea crisis of 2014.

Enter the Americans, with a win-win strategy for the USA and Europe.
Noting that Europe wants gas, and not wanting to be seen to be weak in
the face of Russian foreign policy, the Americans believe they have the
answer. The massive boom in shale gas production in the USA is not only
enabling it to be self-sufficient in energy, but also to sell its
surplus to one of the great energy consumers – Europe.

To do this, the gas needs to be liquefied and shipped across the
Atlantic. This in turn requires liquefied natural gas (LNG) terminals
and ports to be built along the European coastlines to receive the cargo
and turn it back into gas. Washington is already approving licences for
export facilities, and Europe is beginning a long-term project to build
more LNG terminals. Poland and Lithuania are constructing LNG terminals;
other countries such as the Czech Republic want to build pipelines
connecting to those terminals, knowing they could then benefit not just
from American liquefied gas, but also supplies from North Africa and the
Middle East. The Kremlin would no longer be able to turn the taps off.

The Russians, seeing the long-term danger, point out that piped gas is
cheaper than LNG, and President Putin, with a ‘what did I ever do wrong’
expression on his face, says that Europe already has a reliable and
cheaper source of gas coming from his country. LNG is unlikely to <span
id="chapter01.html#page_25"></span>completely replace Russian gas, but
it will strengthen what is a weak European hand in both price
negotiation and foreign policy. To prepare for a potential reduction in
revenue Russia is planning pipelines heading south-east and hopes to
increase sales to China.

This is an economic battle based on geography and one of the modern
examples where technology is being utilised in an attempt to beat the
geographic restraints of earlier eras.

Away from the heartland Russia does have a global political reach and
uses its influence, notably in Latin America, where it buddies up to
whichever South American country has the least friendly relationship
with the United States, for example Venezuela. It tries to check
American moves in the Middle East, or at least ensure it has a say in
matters, it is spending massively on its Arctic military forces, and it
consistently takes an interest in Greenland to maintain its territorial
claims. Since the fall of Communism it has focused less on Africa, but
maintains what influence it can there albeit in a losing battle with
China.

At home it is facing many challenges, not least of which is demographic.
The sharp decline in population growth may have been arrested, but it
remains a problem. The average lifespan for a Russian man is below
sixty-five, ranking Russia in the bottom half of the world’s 193 UN
member states, and there are now only 144 million Russians (excluding
Crimea).

From the Grand Principality of Muscovy, through Peter the Great, Stalin
and now Putin, each Russian leader has been confronted by the same
problems. It doesn’t matter if the ideology of those in control is
tsarist, Communist or crony capitalist – the ports still freeze, and the
North European Plain is still flat.

Strip out the lines of nation states, and the map Ivan the Terrible
confronted is the same one Vladimir Putin is faced with to this day.

<span id="chapter02.html"></span>

<span id="chapter02.html#page_26"></span><span id="chapter02.html#page_27"></span>CHAPTER 2 []
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**CHINA** []
---------

 

*‘China is a civilisation pretending to be a nation.’*  
Lucian Pye, political scientist

<span id="chapter02.html#page_28"></span><span
id="chapter02.html#page_29"></span>![illustration](media/prisoners-of-geography-assets/images/f0028-01.png)

 

<span id="chapter02.html#page_30"></span><span
class="big">I</span><small>N OCTOBER 2006, A US NAVAL SUPERCARRIER GROUP
LED BY THE</small> 1,000-foot USS *Kitty Hawk* was confidently sailing
through the East China Sea between southern Japan and Taiwan, minding
everyone’s business, when, without warning, a Chinese navy submarine
surfaced in the middle of the group.

An American aircraft carrier of that size is surrounded by about twelve
other warships, with air cover above and submarine cover below. The
Chinese vessel, a Song-class attack submarine, may well be very quiet
when running on electric power but, still, this was the equivalent to
Pepsi-Cola’s management popping up in a Coca-Cola board meeting after
listening under the table for half an hour.

The Americans were amazed and angry in equal measure. Amazed because
they had no idea a Chinese sub could do that without being noticed,
angry because they hadn’t noticed and because they regarded the move as
provocative, especially as the sub was within torpedo range of the
*Kitty Hawk* itself. They protested, perhaps too much, and the Chinese
said: ‘Oh! What a coincidence, us surfacing in the middle of your battle
group which is off our coast, we had no idea.’

This was twenty-first-century reverse gunboat diplomacy; whereas the
British used to heave a man-of-war off the coast of some minor power to
signal intent, the Chinese hove into view off their own coast with a
clear message: ‘We are now a maritime power, this is our time, and this
is our sea.’ It has taken 4,000 years, but the Chinese are coming to a
port – and a shipping lane – near you.

Until now China has never been a naval power – with its large land <span
id="chapter02.html#page_31"></span>mass, multiple borders and short sea
routes to trading partners, it had no need to be, and it was rarely
ideologically expansive. Its merchants have long sailed the oceans to
trade goods, but its navy did not seek territory beyond its region, and
the difficulty of patrolling the great sea lanes of the Pacific,
Atlantic and Indian Oceans was not worth the effort. It was always a
land power, with a lot of land and a lot of people – now nearly 1.4
billion.

The concept of China as an inhabited entity began almost 4,000 years
ago. The birthplace of Chinese civilisation is the region known as the
North China Plain, which the Chinese refer to as the Central Plain. A
large, low-lying tract of nearly 160,000 square miles, it is situated
below Inner Mongolia, south of Manchuria, in and around the Yellow River
Basin and down past the Yangtze River, which both run east to west. It
is now one of the most densely populated areas in the world.

The Yellow River basin is subject to frequent and devastating floods,
earning the river the unenviable sobriquet of ‘Scourge of the Sons of
Han’. The industrialisation of the region began in earnest in the 1950s
and has been rapidly accelerating in the last three decades. The
terribly polluted river is now so clogged with toxic waste that it
sometimes struggles even to reach the sea. Nevertheless the Yellow River
is to China what the Nile is to Egypt – the cradle of its civilisation,
where its people learnt to farm, to make paper and gunpowder.

To the north of this proto-China were the harsh lands of the Gobi Desert
in what is now Mongolia. To the west the land gradually rises until it
becomes the Tibetan Plateau, reaching to the Himalayas. To the
south-east and south lies the sea.

The heartland, as the North China Plain is known, was and is a large,
fertile plain with two main rivers and a climate that allows rice and
soy beans to be harvested twice a season (double-cropping), which
encouraged rapid population growth. By 1500 <small>BCE</small> in this
heartland, out <span id="chapter02.html#page_32"></span>of hundreds of
mini city-states, many warring with each other, emerged the earliest
version of a Chinese state – the Shang dynasty. This is where what
became known as the Han people emerged, protecting the heartland and
creating a buffer zone around them.

The Han now make up over 90 per cent of China’s population and they
dominate Chinese politics and business. They are differentiated by
Mandarin, Cantonese and many other regional languages, but united by
ethnicity and at a political level by the geopolitical impulsion to
protect the heartland. Mandarin, which originated in the northern part
of the region, is by far the dominant language and is the medium of
government, national state television and education. Mandarin is similar
to Cantonese and many other languages when written, but very different
when spoken.

The heartland is the political, cultural, demographic and – crucially –
the agricultural centre of gravity. About a billion people live in this
part of China, despite it being just half the size of the United States,
which has a population of 322 million. Because the terrain of the
heartland lent itself to settlement and an agrarian lifestyle, the early
dynasties felt threatened by the non-Han regions which surrounded them,
especially Mongolia with its nomadic bands of violent warriors.

China chose the same strategy as Russia: attack as defence, leading to
power. As we shall see, there were natural barriers which – if the Han
could reach them and establish control – would protect them. It was a
struggle over millennia, only fully realised with the annexation of
Tibet in 1951.

By the time of the famous Chinese philosopher Confucius (551–479
<small>BCE</small>) there was a strong feeling of Chinese identity and
of a divide between civilised China and the ‘barbarous’ regions which
surrounded it. This was a sense of identity shared by sixty million or
so people.

By 200 <small>BCE</small> China had expanded towards, but not reached,
Tibet in <span id="chapter02.html#page_33"></span>the south-west, north
to the grasslands of Central Asia and south all the way down to the
South China Sea. The Great Wall (known as the Long Wall in China) had
been first built by the Qin dynasty (221–207 <small>BCE</small>), and on
the map China was beginning to take on what we now recognise as its
modern form. It would be more than 2,000 years before today’s borders
were fixed, however.

Between 605 and 609 <small>CE</small> the Grand Canal, centuries in the
making and today the world’s longest man-made waterway, was extended and
finally linked the Yellow River to the Yangtze. The Sui dynasty (581–618
<small>CE</small>) had harnessed the vast numbers of workers under its
control and used them to connect existing natural tributaries into a
navigable waterway between the two great rivers. This tied the northern
and southern Han to each other more closely than ever before. It took
several million slaves five years to do the work, but the ancient
problem of how to move supplies south to north had been solved – but not
the problem which exists to this day, that of flooding.

The Han still warred with each other, but increasingly less so, and by
the early eleventh century <small>CE</small> they were forced to
concentrate their attention on the waves of Mongols pouring down from
the north. The Mongols defeated whichever dynasty, north or south, they
came up against and by 1279 their leader Kublai Khan became the first
foreigner to rule all of the country as Emperor of the Mongol (Yuan)
dynasty. It would be almost ninety years before the Han took charge of
their own affairs with the establishment of the Ming dynasty.

By now there was increasing contact with traders and emissaries from the
emerging nation states of Europe, such as Spain and Portugal. The
Chinese leaders were against any sort of permanent European presence,
but increasingly opened up the coastal regions to trade. It remains a
feature of China to this day that when China opens up, the coastland
regions prosper but the inland areas are neglected. The prosperity
engendered by trade has made coastal cities such as Shanghai <span
id="chapter02.html#page_34"></span>wealthy, but that wealth has not been
reaching the countryside. This has added to the massive influx of people
into urban areas and accentuated regional differences.

In the eighteenth century China reached into parts of Burma and
Indochina to the south, and Xinjiang in the north-west was conquered,
becoming the country’s biggest province. An area of rugged mountains and
vast desert basins, Xinjiang is 642,820 square miles, twice the size of
Texas – or, to put it another way, you could fit the UK, France,
Germany, Austria, Switzerland, the Netherlands and Belgium into it and
still have room for Luxembourg. And Liechtenstein.

But, in adding to its size, China also added to its problems. Xinjiang,
a region populated by Muslims, was a perennial source of instability,
indeed insurrection, as were other regions; but for the Han the buffer
was worth the trouble, even more so after the fate which befell the
country in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries with the coming of the
Europeans.

The imperial powers arrived, the British among them, and carved the
country up into spheres of influence. It was, and is, the greatest
humiliation the Chinese suffered since the Mongol invasions. This is a
narrative the Communist Party uses frequently; it is in part true, but
it is also useful to cover up the Party’s own failures and repressive
policies.

Later the Japanese – expanding their territory as an emerging world
power – invaded, attacking first in 1932 and then again in 1937, after
which they occupied most of the heartland as well as Manchuria and Inner
Mongolia. Japan’s unconditional surrender to the Americans at the end of
the Second World War in 1945 led to the withdrawal of Japanese troops,
although in Manchuria they were replaced by the advancing Soviet army,
which then withdrew in 1946.

A few outside observers thought the post-war years might bring liberal
democracy to China. It was wishful thinking akin to the naive nonsense
Westerners wrote during the early days of the recent ‘Arab <span
id="chapter02.html#page_35"></span>Spring’, which, as with China, was
based on a lack of understanding of the internal dynamics of the people,
politics and geography of the region.

Instead, nationalist forces under Chiang Kai-shek and Communist armies
under Chairman Mao battled for supremacy until 1949, when the Communists
emerged victorious and the Nationalists withdrew to Taiwan. That same
year Radio Beijing announced: ‘The People’s Liberation Army must
liberate all Chinese territories, including Tibet, Xinjiang, Hainan and
Taiwan.’

Mao centralised power to an extent never seen in previous dynasties. He
blocked Russian influence in Inner Mongolia and extended Beijing’s
influence into Mongolia. In 1951 China completed its annexation of Tibet
(another vast non-Han territory), and by then Chinese school textbook
maps were beginning to depict China as stretching even into the Central
Asian republics. The country had been put back together; Mao would spend
the rest of his life ensuring it stayed that way and consolidating
Communist Party control in every facet of life, but turning away from
much of the outside world. The country remained desperately poor,
especially away from the coastal areas, but unified.

Mao’s successors tried to turn his Long March to victory into an
economic march towards prosperity. In the early 1980s the Chinese leader
Deng Xiaoping coined the term ‘Socialism with Chinese Characteristics’,
which appears to translate as ‘Total control for the Communist Party in
a Capitalist Economy’. China was becoming a major trading power and a
rising military giant. By the end of the 1990s it had recovered from the
shock of the Tiananmen Square massacre of 1989, regained Hong Kong and
Macau from the British and Portuguese respectively, and could look
around its borders, assess its security and plan ahead for its great
move out into the world.

If we look at China’s modern borders we see a great power now confident
that it is secured by its geographical features, which lend themselves
<span id="chapter02.html#page_36"></span>to effective defence and trade.
In China the points of the compass are always listed in the order
east–south–west–north, but let’s start in the north and move clockwise.

In the north we see the 2,906-mile-long border with Mongolia. Straddling
this border is the Gobi Desert. Nomadic warriors from ancient times
might have been able to attack south across it, but a modern army would
be spotted massing there weeks before it was ready to advance, and it
would have incredibly long supply lines running across inhospitable
terrain before it got into Inner Mongolia (part of China) and towards
the heartland. There are few roads fit to move heavy armour, and few
habitable areas. The Gobi Desert is a massive early warning
system-cumdefensive line. Any Chinese expansion northward will come not
via the military, but from trade deals as China attempts to hoover up
Mongolia’s natural resources, primarily minerals. This will bring with
it increased migration of the Han into Mongolia.

Next door, to the east, is China’s border with Russia, which runs all
the way to the Pacific Ocean – or at least the Sea of Japan subdivision
of it. Above this is the mountainous Russian Far East, a huge,
inhospitable territory with a tiny population. Below it is Manchuria,
which the Russians would have to push through if they wanted to reach
the Chinese heartland. The population of Manchuria is 100 million and
growing; in contrast, the Russian Far East has fewer than seven million
people and no indications of population growth. Large-scale migration
south to north can be expected, which will in turn give China more
leverage in its relations with Russia. From a military perspective the
best place to cross would be near the Russian Pacific port of
Vladivostok, but there are few reasons, and no current intentions, to so
do. Indeed, the recent Western sanctions against Russia due to the
crisis in Ukraine have driven Russia into massive economic deals with
China on terms which help keep Russia afloat, but are favourable to the
Chinese. Russia is the junior partner in this relationship.

<span id="chapter02.html#page_37"></span>Below the Russian Far East,
along the coast, are China’s Yellow, East China and South China seas
which lead to the Pacific and Indian Oceans, have many good harbours and
have always been used for trade. But across the waves lie several
island-sized problems – one shaped like Japan, which we shall come to
shortly.

Continuing clockwise, we come to the next land borders: Vietnam, Laos
and Burma. Vietnam is an irritation for China. For centuries the two
have squabbled over territory, and unfortunately for both this is the
one area to the south which has a border an army can get across without
too much trouble – which partially explains the 1,000-year domination
and occupation of Vietnam by China from 111 <small>BCE</small> to 938
<small>CE</small> and their brief cross-border war of 1979. However, as
China’s military prowess grows, Vietnam will be less inclined to get
drawn into a shooting match and will either cosy up even closer to the
Americans for protection or quietly begin shifting diplomatically to
become friends with Beijing. That both countries are nominally
ideologically Communist has little to do with the state of their
relationship: it is their shared geography that has defined relations.
Viewed from Beijing, Vietnam is only a minor threat and a problem that
can be managed.

The border with Laos is hilly jungle terrain, difficult for traders to
cross – and even more complicated for the military. As they move
clockwise to Burma, the jungle hills become mountains until at the
western extreme they are approaching 20,000 feet and beginning to merge
into the Himalayas.

This brings us to Tibet and its importance to China. The Himalayas run
the length of the Chinese–Indian border before descending to become the
Karakorum Range bordering Pakistan, Afghanistan and Tajikistan. This is
nature’s version of a Great Wall of China, or – looking at it from New
Delhi’s side – the Great Wall of India. It cuts the two most populous
countries on the planet off from each other both militarily and
economically.

<span id="chapter02.html#page_38"></span>They have their disputes: China
claims the Indian province of Arunachal Pradesh, India says China is
occupying Aksai Chin; but despite pointing their artillery at each other
high up on this natural wall, both sides have better things to do than
reignite the shooting match which broke out in 1962, when a series of
violent border disputes culminated in vicious large-scale mountain
fighting. Nevertheless, the tension is ever-present and each side needs
to handle the situation with care.

Very little trade has moved between China and India over the centuries,
and that is unlikely to change soon. Of course the border is really the
Tibetan–Indian border – and that is precisely why China has always
wanted to control it.

This is the geopolitics of fear. If China did not control Tibet, it
would always be possible that India might attempt to do so. This would
give India the commanding heights of the Tibetan Plateau and a base from
which to push into the Chinese heartland, as well as control of the
Tibetan sources of three of China’s great rivers, the Yellow, Yangtze
and Mekong, which is why Tibet is known as ‘China’s Water Tower’. China,
a country with approximately the same volume of water usage as the USA,
but with a population five times as large, will clearly not allow that.

It matters not whether India wants to cut off China’s river supply, only
that it would have the power to do so. For centuries China has tried to
ensure that it could never happen. The actor Richard Gere and the Free
Tibet movement will continue to speak out against the injustices of the
occupation, and now settlement, of Tibet by Han Chinese; but in a battle
between the Dalai Lama, the Tibetan independence movement, Hollywood
stars and the Chinese Communist Party – which rules the world’s
second-largest economy – there is only going to be one winner.

When Westerners, be they Mr Gere or Mr Obama, talk about Tibet, the
Chinese find it deeply irritating. Not dangerous, not subversive – just
irritating. They see it not through the prism of human rights, but that
of <span id="chapter02.html#page_39"></span>geopolitical security, and
can only believe that the Westerners are trying to undermine their
security. However, Chinese security has not been undermined and it will
not be, even if there are further uprisings against the Han.
Demographics and geopolitics oppose Tibetan independence.

The Chinese are building ‘facts on the ground’ on the ‘roof of the
world’. In the 1950s the Chinese Communist People’s Army began building
roads into Tibet, and since then they have helped to bring the modern
world to the ancient kingdom; but the roads, and now railways, also
bring the Han.

It was long said to be impossible to build a railway through the
permafrost, the mountains and the valleys of Tibet. Europe’s best
engineers, who had cut through the Alps, said it could not be done. As
late as 1988 the travel writer Paul Theroux wrote in his book *Riding
the Iron Rooster:* ‘The Kunlun Range is a guarantee that the railway
will never get to Lhasa.’ The Kunlun separated Xinjiang province from
Tibet, for which Theroux gave thanks: ‘That is probably a good thing. I
thought I liked railways until I saw Tibet, and then I realised that I
liked wilderness much more.’ But the Chinese built it. Perhaps only they
could have done. The line into the Tibetan capital, Lhasa, was opened in
2006 by the then Chinese President Hu Jintao. Now passenger and goods
trains arrive from as far away as Shanghai and Beijing, four times a
day, every day.

They bring with them many things, such as consumer goods from across
China, computers, colour televisions and mobile phones. They bring
tourists who support the local economy, they bring modernity to an
ancient and impoverished land, a huge improvement in living standards
and healthcare, and they bring the potential to carry Tibetan goods out
to the wider world. But they have also brought several million Han
Chinese settlers.

The true figures are hard to come by: the Free Tibet movement claims
that in the wider cultural Tibetan region Tibetans are now a minority,
but the Chinese government says that in the official Tibetan Autonomous
<span id="chapter02.html#page_40"></span>Region more than 90 per cent of
people are Tibetan. Both sides are exaggerating, but the evidence
suggests the government is the one with the greater degree of
exaggeration. Its figures do not include Han migrants who are not
registered as residents, but the casual observer can see that Han
neighbourhoods now dominate the Tibetan urban areas.

Once, the majority of the population of Manchuria, Inner Mongolia and
Xinjiang were ethnically Manchurian, Mongolian and Uighur; now all three
are majority Han Chinese, or approaching the majority. So it will be
with Tibet.

This means that resentment of the Han will continue to manifest itself
in rioting such as that of 2008, when anti-Chinese Tibetan protestors in
Lhasa burnt and looted Han properties, twenty-one people died and
hundreds were injured. The authorities’ crackdown will continue, the
Free Tibet movement will continue, monks will continue to set themselves
on fire to bring the plight of the Tibetans to the world’s attention –
and the Han will keep coming.

China’s massive population, mostly crammed into the heartland, is
looking for ways to expand. Just as the Americans looked west, so do the
Chinese, and just as the Iron Horse brought the European settlers to the
lands of the Comanche and the Navajo, so the modern Iron Roosters are
bringing the Han to the Tibetans.

Finally the clock hand moves round past the borders with Pakistan,
Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan (all mountainous) before reaching the border
with Kazakhstan, which leads back round north to Mongolia. This is the
ancient Silk Route, the trade land bridge from the Middle Kingdom to the
world. Theoretically it’s a weak spot in China’s defence, a gap between
the mountains and desert; but it is far from the heartland, the Kazakhs
are in no position to threaten China, and Russia is several hundred
miles distant.

South-east of this Kazakh border is the restive ‘semi-autonomous’
Chinese province of Xinjiang and its native Muslim population of the
<span id="chapter02.html#page_41"></span>Uighur people, who speak a
language related to Turkish. Xinjiang borders eight countries: Russia,
Mongolia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Afghanistan, Pakistan and
India.

There was, is and always will be trouble in Xinjiang. The Uighurs have
twice declared an independent state of ‘East Turkestan’, in the 1930s
and 1940s. They watched the collapse of the Russian Empire result in
their former Soviet neighbours in the ‘Stans’ becoming sovereign states,
were inspired by the Tibetan independence movement, and many are now
again calling to break away from China.

Inter-ethnic rioting erupted in 2009, leading to over 200 deaths.
Beijing responded in three ways: it ruthlessly suppressed dissent, it
poured money into the region, and it continued to pour in Han Chinese
workers. For China, Xinjiang is too strategically important to allow an
independence movement to get off the ground: it not only borders eight
countries, thus buffering the heartland, but it also has oil, and is
home to China’s nuclear weapons testing sites.

Most of the new towns and cities springing up across Xinjiang are
overwhelmingly populated by Han Chinese attracted by work in the new
factories in which the central government invests. A classic example is
the city of Shihezi, 85 miles north-west of the capital, Ürümqi. Of its
population of 650,000, it is thought that at least 620,000 are Han.
Overall, Xinjiang is reckoned to be 40 per cent Han, at a conservative
estimate – and even Ürümqi itself may now be majority Han, although
official figures are difficult to obtain and not always reliable due to
their political sensitivity.

There is a ‘World Uighur Congress’ based in Germany, and the ‘East
Turkestan Liberation Movement’ set up in Turkey; but Uighur separatists
lack a Dalai Lama-type figure upon whom foreign media can fix, and their
cause is almost unknown around the world. China tries to keep it that
way, ensuring it stays on good terms with as many border countries as
possible in order to prevent any organised independence <span
id="chapter02.html#page_42"></span>movement from having supply lines or
somewhere to which it could fall back. Beijing also paints separatists
as Islamist terrorists. Al Qaeda and other groups, which have a foothold
in places like Tajikistan, are indeed attempting to forge links with the
Uighur separatists, but the movement is nationalist first, Islamic
second. However, gun, bomb and knife attacks in the region against state
and/or Han targets over the past few years do look as if they will
continue, and could escalate into a full-blown uprising.

China will not cede this territory and, as in Tibet, the window for
independence is closing. Both are buffer zones, one is a major land
trade route, and – crucially – both offer markets (albeit with a limited
income) for an economy which must keep producing and selling goods if it
is to continue to grow and to prevent mass unemployment. Failure to so
do would likely lead to widespread civil disorder, threatening the
control of the Communist Party and the unity of China.

There are similar reasons for the Party’s resistance to democracy and
individual rights. If the population were to be given a free vote, the
unity of the Han might begin to crack or, more likely, the countryside
and urban areas would come into conflict. That in turn would embolden
the people of the buffer zones, further weakening China. It is only a
century since the most recent humiliation of the rape of China by
foreign powers; for Beijing, unity and economic progress are priorities
well ahead of democratic principles.

The Chinese look at society very differently from the West. Western
thought is infused with the rights of the individual; Chinese thought
prizes the collective above the individual. What the West thinks of as
the rights of man, the Chinese leadership thinks of as dangerous
theories endangering the majority, and much of the population accepts
that, at the least, the extended family comes before the individual.

I once took a Chinese Ambassador in London to a high-end French
restaurant in the hope they would repeat Prime Minister Zhou Enlai’s
much-quoted answer to Richard Nixon’s question ‘What is the impact <span
id="chapter02.html#page_43"></span>of the French Revolution?’, to which
the prime minister replied ‘It’s too soon to tell.’ Sadly this was not
forthcoming, but I was treated to a stern lecture about how the full
imposition of ‘what you call human rights’ in China would lead to
widespread violence and death and was then asked, ‘Why do you think your
values would work in a culture you don’t understand?’

The deal between the Party leaders and the people has been, for a
generation now, ‘We’ll make you better off – you will follow our
orders.’ So long as the economy keeps growing, that grand bargain may
last. If it stops, or goes into reverse, the deal is off. The current
level of demonstrations and anger against corruption and inefficiency
are testament to what would happen if the deal breaks.

Another growing problem for the Party is its ability to feed the
population. More than 40 per cent of arable land is now either polluted
or has thinning topsoil, according to their Ministry of Agriculture.

China is caught in a catch-22. It needs to keep industrialising as it
modernises and raises standards of living, but that very process
threatens food production. If it cannot solve this problem there will be
unrest.

There are now around 500 mostly peaceful protests a day across China
over a variety of issues. If you introduce mass unemployment, or mass
hunger, that tally will explode in both number and the degree of force
used by both sides.

So, on the economic side China now also has a grand bargain with the
world – ‘We’ll make the stuff for cheap – you buy it for cheap.’

Leave to one side the fact that already labour costs are rising in China
and it is being rivalled by Thailand and Indonesia, for price if not
volume. What would happen if the resources required to make the stuff
dried up, if someone else got them first, or if there was a naval
blockade of your goods – in and out? Well, for that, you’d need a navy.

The Chinese were great sea voyagers, especially in the fifteenth
century, when they roamed the Indian Ocean; Admiral Zheng He’s <span
id="chapter02.html#page_44"></span>expedition ventured as far as Kenya.
But these were money-making exercises, not power projections, and they
were not designed to create forward bases that could be used to support
military operations.

Having spent 4,000 turbulent years consolidating its land mass, China is
now building a Blue Water navy. A Green Water navy patrols its maritime
borders, a Blue Water navy patrols the oceans. It will take another
thirty years (assuming economic progression) for China to build naval
capacity to seriously challenge the most powerful seaborne force the
world has ever seen – the US navy. But in the medium to short term, as
it builds, and trains, and learns, the Chinese navy will bump up against
its rivals in the seas; and how those bumps are managed – especially the
Sino–American ones – will define great power politics in this century.

The young seamen now training on the second-hand aircraft carrier China
salvaged from a Ukrainian rust yard will be the ones who, if they make
it to the rank of admiral, may have learnt enough to know how to take a
twelve-ship carrier group across the world and back – and if necessary
fight a war along the way. As some of the richer Arab nations came to
realise, you cannot buy an efficient military off the shelf.

Gradually the Chinese will put more and more vessels into the seas off
their coast, and into the Pacific. Each time one is launched there will
be less space for the Americans in the China Seas. The Americans know
this, and know the Chinese are working towards a land-based anti-ship
missile system to double the reasons why the US navy, or any of its
allies, might want one day to think hard about sailing through the South
China Sea. Or indeed, any other ‘China’ sea. And all the while, the
developing Chinese space project will be watching every move the
Americans make, and those of its allies.

So, having gone clockwise around the land borders, we now look east,
south and south-west towards the sea.

Between China and the Pacific is the archipelago that Beijing calls the
‘First Island Chain’. There is also the ‘Nine Dash Line’, more recently
turned into ten dashes in 2013 to include Taiwan, which China says marks
its territory. This dispute over ownership of more than 200 tiny islands
and reefs is poisoning China’s relations with its neighbours. National
pride means China wants to control the passageways through the Chain;
geopolitics dictates it has to. It provides access to the world’s most
important shipping lanes in the South China Sea. In peacetime the route
is open in various places, but in wartime they could very easily be
blocked, thus blockading China. All great nations spend peacetime
preparing for the day war breaks out.

<span
id="chapter02.html#page_45"></span>![illustration](media/prisoners-of-geography-assets/images/f0045-01.png)

The South China Sea is a hotly contested area between China and its
neighbours leading to disputes over ownership of islands, natural
resources and control of the seas and shipping lanes.

Free access to the Pacific is firstly hindered by Japan. Chinese vessels
emerging from the Yellow Sea and rounding the Korean Peninsula would
have to go through the Sea of Japan and up through La Perouse Strait
<span id="chapter02.html#page_46"></span>above Hokkaido and into the
Pacific. Much of this is Japanese or Russian territorial waters and at a
time of great tension, or even hostilities, would be inaccessible to
China. Even if they made it they would still have to navigate through
the Kuril Islands north-east of Hokkaido, which are controlled by Russia
but claimed by Japan.

Japan is also in dispute with China over the uninhabited island chain it
calls Senkaku and the Chinese know as Diaoyu, north-east of Taiwan. This
is the most contentious of all territorial claims between the two
countries. If instead Chinese ships pass through, or indeed set off
from, the East China Sea off Shanghai and go in a straight line towards
the Pacific they must pass the Ryukyu Islands, which include Okinawa –
upon which there is not only a huge American military base, but as many
shore-to-ship missiles as the Japanese can pile at the tip of the
island. The message from Tokyo is: ‘We know you’re going out there, but
don’t mess with us on the way out.’

Another potential flare-up with Japan centres on the East China Sea’s
gas deposits. Beijing has declared an ‘Air Defence Identification Zone’
over most of the sea requiring prior notice before anyone else flies
through it. The Americans and Japanese are trying to ignore it, but it
will become a hot issue at a time of their choosing or due to an
accident which is mismanaged.

Below Okinawa is Taiwan, which sits off the Chinese coast and separates
the East China Sea from the South China Sea. China claims Taiwan as its
twenty-third province, but it is currently an American ally with a navy
and air force armed to the teeth by Washington. It came under Chinese
control in the seventeenth century but has only been ruled by China for
five years in the last century (from 1945 to 1949).

Taiwan’s official name is the Republic of China (ROC) to differentiate
it from the People’s Republic of China, although both sides believe they
should have jurisdiction over both territories. This is a name Beijing
<span id="chapter02.html#page_47"></span>can live with as it does not
state that Taiwan is a separate state. The Americans are committed to
defending Taiwan in the event of a Chinese invasion under the Taiwan
Relations Act of 1979. However, if Taiwan declares full independence
from China, which China would consider an act of war, the USA is not
bound to come to its rescue, as the declaration would be considered
provocative.

The two governments vie for recognition for themselves and
non-recognition of the other in every single country in the world, and
in most cases Beijing wins. When you can offer a potential market of 1.4
billion people as opposed to 23 million, most countries don’t need long
to consider. However, there are twenty-two countries (mostly developing
states such as Swaziland, Burkina Faso and the island of São Tomé and
Príncipe) which do opt for Taiwan, and which are usually handsomely
rewarded.

The Chinese are determined to have Taiwan but are nowhere near being
able to challenge for it militarily. Instead they are using soft power
by increasing trade and tourism between the two states. China wants to
woo Taiwan back into its arms. During the 2014 student protests in Hong
Kong, one of the reasons the authorities did not quickly batter them off
the streets – as they would have done in, for example, Ürümqi – was that
the world’s cameras were there and would have captured the violence. In
China much of this footage would be blocked, but in Taiwan people would
see what the rest of the world saw and ask themselves how close a
relationship they wanted with such a power. Beijing hesitated; it is
playing the long game.

The soft-power approach is to persuade the people of Taiwan they have
nothing to fear in rejoining the ‘Motherland’. The Air Defence
Identification Zone, the surfacing near US ships and the build-up of a
navy are part of a long-term plan to weaken American resolve to defend
an island 140 miles off the coast of mainland China, but 6,400 miles
from the west coast of the USA.

<span id="chapter02.html#page_48"></span>From the South China Sea
Chinese ships would still have problems, whether they headed towards the
Pacific or the Indian Ocean – which is the world’s waterway for the gas
and oil without which China would collapse.

To go westward towards the energy-producing states of the Gulf they must
pass Vietnam, which, as we have noted, has recently been making
overtures to the Americans. They must go near the Philippines, a US
ally, before trying to get through the Strait of Malacca between
Malaysia, Singapore and Indonesia, all of which are diplomatically and
militarily linked to the USA. The Strait is approximately 500 miles long
and at its narrowest is less than two miles wide. It has always been a
choke point – and the Chinese remain vulnerable to being choked. All of
the states along the Strait and near its approaches are anxious about
Chinese dominance, and most have territorial disputes with Beijing.

China claims almost the entire South China Sea, and the energy supplies
believed to be beneath it, as its own. However, Malaysia, Taiwan,
Vietnam, the Philippines and Brunei also have territorial claims against
China and each other. For example, the Philippines and China argue
bitterly over the Mischief Islands, a large reef in the Spratly Islands
in the South China Sea, which one day could live up to their name. Every
one of the hundreds of disputed atolls, and sometimes just rocks poking
out of the water, could be turned into a diplomatic crisis, as
surrounding each rock is a potential dispute about fishing zones,
exploration rights and sovereignty.

China must secure these routes, both for its goods to get to market, and
for the items required to make those goods – oil, gas and precious
metals among them – to get into China. It cannot afford to be blockaded.
Diplomacy is one solution; the ever-growing navy is another; but the
best guarantees are pipelines, roads and ports.

Diplomatically, China will attempt to pull the South-East Asian nations
away from the USA using both carrot and stick. Too much stick, <span
id="chapter02.html#page_49"></span>and the countries will tie themselves
ever closer into defence treaties with Washington; too much carrot, and
they may not bend to Beijing’s will. At the moment they still look
across the Pacific for protection.

The maps of the region that the Chinese now print show almost the whole
of the South China Sea as theirs. This is a statement of intent, backed
by aggressive naval patrols and official statements. Beijing intends to
change its neighbours’ ways of thinking and to change America’s way of
thinking and behaving – pushing and pushing an agenda until its
competitors back off. At stake here is the concept of international
waters and free passage in peacetime; it is not something which will
easily be given up by the other powers.

The geopolitical writer Robert Kaplan expounds the theory that the South
China Sea is to the Chinese in the twenty-first century what the
Caribbean was to the USA at the beginning of the twentieth century. The
Americans, having consolidated their land mass, had become a two-ocean
power (Atlantic and Pacific), and then moved to control the seas around
them, pushing the Spanish out of Cuba.

China also intends to become a two-ocean power (Pacific and Indian). To
achieve this China is investing in deep-water ports in Burma,
Bangladesh, Pakistan and Sri Lanka – an investment which buys it good
relations, the potential for its future navy to have friendly bases to
visit or reside in, and trade links back home.

The Indian Ocean and Bay of Bengal ports are part of an even bigger plan
to secure China’s future. From Burma’s west coastline China has built
natural gas and oil pipelines linking the Bay of Bengal up into
south-west China – China’s way of reducing its nervous reliance on the
Strait of Malacca, through which almost 80 per cent of its energy
supplies pass. This partially explains why, when the Burmese Junta began
to slowly open up to the outside world in 2010, it wasn’t just the
Chinese who beat a path to their door. The Americans and Japanese were
quick to establish better relations, with both President Obama and Prime
Minister <span id="chapter02.html#page_50"></span>Abe of Japan going to
pay their respects in person. If they can influence Burma, they can help
check China. So far, the Chinese are winning this particular game on the
global chessboard, but the Americans may be able to outmuscle them as
long as the Burmese government is confident Washington will stand by it.

The Chinese are also building ports in Kenya, railway lines in Angola,
and a hydroelectric dam in Ethiopia. They are scouring the length and
breadth of the whole of Africa for minerals and precious metals.

Chinese companies and workers are spread out across the world; slowly
China’s military will follow. With great power comes great
responsibility. China will not leave the sea lanes in its neighbourhood
to be policed by the Americans. There will be events which require the
Chinese to act out of region. A natural disaster or a terrorist/hostage
incident involving large numbers of Chinese workers would require China
to take action, and that entails forward bases, or at least agreements
from states that China could pass through their territory. There are now
tens of millions of Chinese around the world, in some cases housed in
huge complexes for workers in parts of Africa.

China will struggle to become agile over the next decade. It could
barely manoeuvre the People’s Army’s equipment to help in the aftermath
of the devastating 2008 earthquake in Sichuan. It mobilised the army,
but not their *materiel;* moving abroad at speed would be an even
greater challenge.

This will change. China is not weighed down or motivated diplomatically
or economically by human rights in its dealings with the world. It is
secure in its borders, straining against the bonds of the First Island
Chain, and now moving around the globe with confidence. If it can avoid
a serious conflict with Japan or the USA, then the only real danger to
China is itself.

There are 1.4 billion reasons why China may succeed, and 1.4 billion
reasons why it may not surpass America as the greatest power in <span
id="chapter02.html#page_51"></span>the world. A great depression like
that of the 1930s could set it back decades. China has locked itself
into the global economy. If we don’t buy, they don’t make. And if they
don’t make there will be mass unemployment. If there is mass and
long-term unemployment, in an age when the Chinese are a people packed
into urban areas, the inevitable social unrest could be – like
everything else in modern China – on a scale hitherto unseen.

<span id="chapter03.html"></span>

<span id="chapter03.html#page_52"></span><span id="chapter03.html#page_53"></span>CHAPTER 3 []
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**USA** []
-------

 

*‘Reports of my death have been greatly exaggerated.’*  
Mark Twain

<span id="chapter03.html#page_54"></span><span
id="chapter03.html#page_55"></span>![illustration](media/prisoners-of-geography-assets/images/f0054-01.png)

 

<span id="chapter03.html#page_56"></span><span
class="big">L</span><small>OCATION, LOCATION, LOCATION. IF YOU WON THE
LOTTERY, AND</small> were looking to buy a country to live in, the first
one the estate agent would show you would be the United States of
America.

Twain was referring to the erroneous reporting of his death, but he
could have been talking about the over-reporting of the demise of the
USA.

It’s in a wonderful neighbourhood, the views are marvellous and there
are some terrific water features, the transport links are excellent; and
the neighbours? The neighbours are great, no trouble at all.

If you broke this living space up into numerous sections it would
considerably lower its value – especially if the tenants did not all
speak the same language and paid the rent in different currencies – but
as one home, for one family, it can’t be bettered.

There are fifty American states, but they add up to one nation in a way
the twenty-eight sovereign states of the European Union never can. Most
of the EU states have a national identity far stronger, more defined,
than any American state. It is easy to find a French person who is
French first, European second, or one who pays little allegiance to the
idea of Europe, but an American identifies with their Union in a way few
Europeans do theirs. This is explained by geography, and by the history
of the unification of the USA.

Painting this vast country in bold, broad brushstrokes from east to
west, you can divide it into three parts.

First there is the East Coast Plain leading to the Appalachian
Mountains, an area well watered by short but navigable rivers and with
<span id="chapter03.html#page_57"></span>fertile soil. Then, heading
further west, you have the Great Plains stretching all the way to the
Rocky Mountains, and within this section lies the Mississippi basin with
its network of huge, navigable rivers flowing into the Mississippi River
all the way down to the Gulf of Mexico, which is sheltered by the
peninsula of Florida and several islands. Once over the massive mountain
range that is the Rockies you get to the desert, the Sierra Nevada
Mountains, a narrow coastal plain, and finally to the shores of the
Pacific Ocean.

To the north, above the Great Lakes, lies the Canadian Shield, the
world’s largest area of Precambrian rock, much of which forms a barrier
to human settlement. To the south-west – desert. Geography had
determined that if a political entity could get to and then control the
land ‘from sea to shining sea’, it would be a great power, the greatest
history has known. Considering the continent is 3,000 miles from coast
to coast, this was achieved in an astonishingly quick time.

When the Europeans first began to land and stay in the early seventeenth
century, they quickly realised that the east coast of this ‘virgin’
territory was packed with natural harbours and fertile soil. Here was a
place where they could live and, unlike their home countries, a place
where they hoped they could live freely. Their descendants would go on
to deny the native inhabitants their freedom, but that was not the
intention of the first settlers. Geography pulled them across the
Atlantic in ever greater numbers.

The last of the original thirteen colonies to be established was Georgia
in 1732. The thirteen became increasingly independently minded all the
way up to the American Revolutionary War (1775–83). At the beginning of
this period the colonies, which gradually began to connect to each
other, stretched 1,000 miles from Massachusetts in the north, down to
Georgia, and had an estimated combined population of about 2.5 million
people. They were bounded by the Atlantic to their east, and the
Appalachian Mountains to their west. The Appalachians, 1,500 miles <span
id="chapter03.html#page_58"></span>long, are impressive, but compared to
the Rockies, not particularly high. Nevertheless, they still formed a
formidable barrier to westward movement for the early settlers, who were
busy consolidating what territory they had subdued and preparing to
govern it themselves. The colonists had another barrier, this one
political. The British government forbade settlement west of the
Appalachians as it wanted to ensure that trade, and taxes, remained on
the Eastern seaboard.

The Declaration of Independence (1776) states: ‘When in the course of
human events, it becomes necessary for one people to dissolve the
political bands which have connected them with another, and to assume
the Powers of the earth, the separate and equal station to which the
Laws of Nature and of Nature’s God entitle them, a decent respect to the
opinions of mankind requires that they should declare the causes which
impel them to the separation.’ It goes on to outline at some length
those causes, and to state (with no hint of slave-owning irony) that it
was self-evident that all men were created equal. These noble sentiments
helped to fuel the victory in the War of Independence, which in turn
gave birth to a new nation state.

In the early 1800s this new country’s leadership still had little idea
that it was thousands of miles from the ‘South Sea’ or Pacific. Using
Indian trails, a few explorers, for whom the word intrepid could have
been coined, had pushed through the Appalachians and reached the
Mississippi. There they thought they might find a waterway leading to
the ocean and thus joining up with the vast tracts of lands the Spanish
had explored across the south-western and Pacific coastal regions,
including what are now Texas and California.

At this point the fledgling USA was far from secure, and if it had been
restricted to its then boundaries, would have struggled to become a
great power. Its citizens already had access to the Ohio River, just
west of the Appalachians, but that led to the Mississippi, whose western
bank was controlled by the French all the way down to the city of New
Orleans. <span id="chapter03.html#page_59"></span>This gave the French
command of American trade heading out to the Old World from the Gulf of
Mexico, as well as the vast territory to the west in what is now the
American heartland. In 1802, a year after Thomas Jefferson assumed the
presidency, he wrote: ‘There is on the globe one single spot, the
possessor of which is our natural and habitual enemy. It is New
Orleans.’

So France was the possessor and the problem; but the solution,
unusually, was not warfare.

In 1803 the United States simply bought control of the entire Louisiana
Territory from France. The land stretched from the Gulf of Mexico
north-west up to the headwaters of the tributaries of the Mississippi
River in the Rocky Mountains. It was an area equivalent in size to
modern-day Spain, Italy, France, the UK and Germany combined. With it
came the Mississippi basin, from which flowed America’s route to
greatness.

At the stroke of a pen, and the handing over of $15 million, the
Louisiana Purchase of 1803 doubled the size of the USA and gave it
mastery over the greatest inland water transport route in the world. As
the American historian Henry Adams wrote, ‘Never did the United States
get so much for so little.’

The greater Mississippi basin has more miles of navigable river than the
rest of the world put together. Nowhere else are there so many rivers
whose source is not in high land, and whose waters run smoothly all the
way to the ocean across vast distances. The Mississippi, fed by much of
the basin river system, begins near Minneapolis and ends 1,800 miles
away in the Gulf of Mexico. So the rivers were the natural conduit for
ever-increasing trade, leading to a great port and all using waterborne
craft which was, and is, many times cheaper than road travel.

The Americans now had strategic geographical depth, a massive fertile
land and an alternative to the Atlantic ports with which to conduct
business. They also had ever-expanding routes east to west linking the
<span id="chapter03.html#page_60"></span>East Coast to the new
territory, and then the river systems flowing north to south to connect
the then sparsely populated lands with each other, thus encouraging
America to form as a single entity.

There was now a sense that the nation would become a colossus, a
continental power. They pushed onwards, ever westwards, but with an eye
on the south and the security of the jewel in the crown – the
Mississippi.

By 1814 the British had gone, and the French had given up on Louisiana.
The trick now was to get the Spanish to go. It wasn’t too difficult. The
Spanish were exhausted by the war in Europe against Napoleon; the
Americans were pushing the Seminole Indian nation into Spanish Florida,
and Madrid knew that waves of settlers would be following. In 1819 the
Spanish ceded Florida to the USA and with it a massive amount of
territory.

The Louisiana Purchase had given the USA the heartland, but the
Transcontinental Treaty of 1819 gave them something almost as valuable.
The Spanish accepted that the USA would have jurisdiction in the far
west above the 42nd parallel, on what is now the border of California
and Oregon, while Spain would control what lay below, west of the
American territories. The USA had reached the Pacific.

At the time most Americans thought the great victory of 1819 was getting
Florida, but Secretary of State John Quincy Adams wrote in his diary:
‘The acquisition of a definite line of boundary to the \[Pacific\] forms
a great epoch in our history.’

But there was another Spanish-speaking problem – Mexico.

Because the Louisiana Purchase doubled the size of the USA, when Mexico
became independent of Spain in 1821 its border was just 200 miles from
the port of New Orleans. In the twenty-first century Mexico poses no
territorial threat to the USA, although its proximity causes America
problems, as it feeds its northern neighbour’s appetite for illegal
labour and drugs.

<span id="chapter03.html#page_61"></span>In 1821 that was different.
Mexico controlled land all the way up to northern California, which the
USA could live with, but it also stretched out east, including what is
now Texas which, then as now, borders Louisiana. Mexico’s population at
the time was 6.2 million, the USA’s 9.6 million. The US army may have
been able to see off the mighty British, but they had been fighting
3,000 miles from home with supply lines across an ocean. The Mexicans
were next door.

Quietly, Washington encouraged Americans and new arrivals to begin to
settle on both sides of the US–Mexican border. Waves of immigrants came
and spread west and south-west. There was little chance of them putting
down roots in the region we now know as modern Mexico, thus
assimilating, and boosting the population numbers there. Mexico is not
blessed in the American way. It has poor-quality agricultural land, no
river system to use for transport, and was wholly undemocratic, with new
arrivals having little chance of ever being granted land.

While the infiltration of Texas was going on, Washington issued the
‘Monroe Doctrine’ (named after President James Monroe) in 1823. This
boiled down to warning the European powers that they could no longer
seek land in the Western Hemisphere, and that if they lost any parts of
their existing territory they could not reclaim them. Or else.

By the mid-1830s there were enough white settlers in Texas to force the
Mexican issue. The Mexican, Catholic, Spanish-speaking population
numbered in the low thousands, but there were about 20,000 white
Protestant settlers. The Texas Revolution of 1835–6 drove the Mexicans
out, but it was a close-run thing, and had the settlers lost then the
Mexican army would have been in a position to march on New Orleans and
control the southern end of the Mississippi. It is one of the great
‘what ifs’ of modern history.

However, history turned the other way and Texas became independent via
American money, arms and ideas. The territory went on to join the Union
in 1845 and together they fought the 1846–8 Mexican War, <span
id="chapter03.html#page_62"></span>in which they crushed their southern
neighbour, which was required to accept that Mexico ended in the sands
of the southern bank of the Rio Grande.

With California, New Mexico and land which is now Arizona, Nevada, Utah
and part of Colorado included, the borders of continental USA then
looked similar to those of today, and they are in many ways natural
borders. In the south, the Rio Grande runs through desert; to the north
are great lakes and rocky land with few people close to the border,
especially in the eastern half of the continent; and to the east and
west – the great oceans. However, in the twenty-first century, in the
south-west the cultural historical memory of the region as Hispanic land
is likely to resurface, as the demographics are changing rapidly and
Hispanics will be the majority population within a few decades.

But back to 1848. The Europeans had gone, the Mississippi basin was
secure from land attack, the Pacific was reached and it was obvious that
the remaining Indian nations would be subdued: there was no threat to
the USA. It was time to make some money, and then venture out across the
seas to secure the approaches to the three coastlines of the
superpower-to-be.

The California Gold Rush of 1848–9 helped, but the immigrants were
heading west anyway. After all, there was a continental empire to build,
and as it developed, more immigrants followed. The Homestead Act of 1862
awarded 160 acres of federally owned land to anyone who farmed it for
five years and paid a small fee. If you were a poor man from Germany,
Scandinavia, or Italy, why go to Latin America and be a serf, when you
could go to the USA and be a free land-owning man?

In 1867 Alaska was bought from Russia. At the time it was known as
‘Seward’s folly’ after the Secretary of State, William Seward, who
agreed the deal. He paid $7.2 million, or 2 cents an acre. The press
accused him of purchasing snow, but minds were changed with the
discovery of major gold deposits in 1896. Decades later huge reserves of
oil were also found.

<span id="chapter03.html#page_63"></span>Two years on, in 1869, came the
opening of the transcontinental railroad. Now you could cross the
country in a week, whereas it had previously taken several hazardous
months.

As the country grew, and grew wealthy, it began to develop a Blue Water
navy. For most of the nineteenth century foreign policy was dominated by
expanding trade and avoiding entanglements outside the neighbourhood,
but it was time to push out and protect the approaches to the
coastlines. The only real threat was from Spain – it may have been
persuaded to leave the mainland but it still controlled the islands of
Cuba, Puerto Rico and part of what is now the Dominican Republic.

Cuba in particular kept American presidents awake at night, as it would
again in 1962 during the Cuban Missile Crisis. The island sits just off
Florida, giving it access to and potential control of the Florida
Straits and the Yucatan Channel in the Gulf of Mexico. This is the exit
and entry route for the port of New Orleans.

Spain’s power may have been diminishing towards the end of the
nineteenth century, but it was still a formidable military force. In
1898 the USA declared war on Spain, routed its military and gained
control of Cuba, with Puerto Rica, Guam and the Philippines thrown in
for good measure. They would all come in useful, but Guam in particular
is a vital strategic asset and Cuba a strategic threat if controlled by
a major power.

In 1898 that threat was removed by war with Spain. In 1962 it was
removed by the threat of war with the Soviet Union after they blinked
first. Today no great power sponsors Cuba and it appears destined to
come under the cultural, and probably political, influence of the USA
again.

America was moving quickly. In the same year it secured Cuba, the
Florida Straits and to a great extent the Caribbean, it also annexed the
Pacific island of Hawaii, thus protecting the approaches to its own west
coast. In 1903 America signed a treaty leasing it exclusive rights to
the Panama Canal. Trade was booming.

<span id="chapter03.html#page_64"></span>Most presidents bore in mind
George Washington’s advice in his farewell address in 1796 not to get
involved in ‘inveterate antipathies against particular nations, and
passionate attachments for others’, and to ‘steer clear of permanent
alliances with any portion of the foreign world’.

Apart from a late – albeit crucial – entry into the First World War,
twentieth-century America did manage, mostly, to avoid entanglements and
alliances until 1941.

The Second World War changed everything. The USA was attacked by an
increasingly militaristic Japan after Washington imposed economic
sanctions on Tokyo which would have brought the country to its knees.
The Americans came out swinging. They projected their now vast power
around the world, and in order to keep things that way, this time they
didn’t go home.

As the world’s greatest economic and military post-war power, America
now needed to control the world’s sea lanes, to keep the peace and get
the goods to market.

They were the ‘last man standing’. The Europeans had exhausted
themselves, and their economies, like their towns and cities, were in
ruins. The Japanese were crushed, the Chinese devastated and at war with
each other, the Russians weren’t even in the capitalist game.

A century earlier, the British had learnt they needed forward bases and
coaling stations from which to project and protect their naval power.
Now, with Britain in decline, the Americans looked lasciviously at the
British assets and said, ‘Nice bases – we’ll have them.’

The price was right. In the autumn of 1940 the British had desperately
needed more warships. The Americans had fifty spare and so, with what
was called the ‘Destroyers for Bases Agreement’, the British swapped
their ability to be a global power for help in remaining in the war.
Almost every British naval base in the Western Hemisphere was handed
over.

<span id="chapter03.html#page_65"></span>This was, and is still, for all
countries, about concrete. Concrete in the building of ports, runways,
hardened aircraft hangars, fuel depots, dry docks and Special Forces
training areas. In the East, after the defeat of Japan, America seized
the opportunity to build these all over the Pacific. Guam, halfway
across, they already had; now they had bases right up to the Japanese
island of Okinawa in the East China Sea.

The Americans also looked to the land. If they were going to pay to
reconstruct Europe through the Marshall Plan of 1948–51, they had to
ensure that the Soviet Union wouldn’t wreck the place and reach the
Atlantic coast. The Doughboys didn’t go home. Instead they set up shop
in Germany and faced down the Red Army across the North European Plain.

In 1949 Washington led the formation of NATO and with it effectively
assumed command of the Western world’s surviving military might. The
civilian head of NATO might well be a Belgian one year, a Brit the next,
but the military commander is always an American, and by far the
greatest firepower within NATO is American.

No matter what the treaty says, NATO’s Supreme Commander ultimately
answers to Washington. The UK and France would learn to their cost
during the Suez Crisis of 1956, when they were compelled by American
pressure to cease their occupation of the canal zone, losing most of
their influence in the Middle East as a result, that a NATO country does
not hold a strategic naval policy without first asking Washington.

With Iceland, Norway, Britain and Italy (all founding members of NATO)
having granted the USA access and rights to their bases, it now
dominated the North Atlantic and the Mediterranean as well as the
Pacific. In 1951 it extended its domination there down to the south by
forming an alliance with Australia and New Zealand, and also to the
north following the Korean War of 1950–53.

In the 1960s the USA’s failure in Vietnam damaged its confidence, <span
id="chapter03.html#page_66"></span>and made it more cautious about
foreign entanglements. However, what was effectively a defeat did not
substantially alter America’s global strategy.

There were now only three places from which a challenge to American
hegemony could come: a united Europe, Russia and China. All would grow
stronger, but two would reach their limits.

The dream of some Europeans of an EU with ‘ever closer union’ and a
common foreign and defence policy is dying slowly before our eyes, and
even if it were not the EU countries spend so little on defence that
ultimately they remain reliant on the USA. The economic crash of 2008
has left the European powers reduced in capacity and with little
appetite for foreign adventures.

In 1991 the Russian threat had been seen off due to Russia’s own
staggering economic incompetence, military overstretch and failure to
persuade the subjected masses in its empire that gulags and the
overproduction of state-funded tractors was the way ahead. The recent
push-back by Putin’s Russia is a thorn in America’s side, but not a
serious threat to America’s dominance. When President Obama described
Russia as ‘no more than a regional power’ in 2014 he may have been
needlessly provocative, but he wasn’t wrong. The bars of Russia’s
geographical prison, as seen in [Chapter One](#chapter01.html), are
still in place: they still lack a warm-water port with access to the
global sea lanes and still lack the military capacity in wartime to
reach the Atlantic via the Baltic and North seas, or the Black Sea and
the Mediterranean.

The USA was partially behind the change of government in Ukraine in
2014. It wanted to extend democracy in the world, and it wanted to pull
Ukraine away from Russian influence and thus weaken President Putin.
Washington knows that during the last decade, as America was distracted
in Iraq and Afghanistan, the Russians took advantage in what they call
their ‘near abroad’, regaining a solid footing in places such as
Kazakhstan and seizing territory in Georgia. Belatedly, and <span
id="chapter03.html#page_67"></span>somewhat half-heartedly, the
Americans have been trying to roll back Russian gains.

Americans care about Europe, they care about NATO, they will sometimes
act (if it is in the American interest), but Russia is now, for the
Americans, mostly a European problem, albeit one they keep an eye on.

That leaves China, and China rising.

Most analysis written over the past decade assumes that by the middle of
the twenty-first century China will overtake the USA and become the
leading superpower. For reasons partially discussed in [Chapter
Two](#chapter02.html), I am not convinced. It may take a century.

Economically the Chinese are on their way to matching the Americans and
that buys them a lot of influence and a place at the top table, but
militarily and strategically they are decades behind. The USA will spend
those decades attempting to ensure it stays that way, but it feels
inevitable that the gap will close.

The concrete costs a lot. Not just to mix and pour, but to be allowed to
mix and pour it where you want to. As we saw with the ‘Destroyers for
Bases Agreement’, American assistance to other governments is not always
entirely altruistic. Economic and, equally importantly, military
assistance buys permission to pour the concrete, but much more as well,
even if there is also an added cost.

For example, Washington might be outraged at human rights abuses in
Syria (a hostile state) and express its opinions loudly, but its outrage
at abuses in Bahrain might be somewhat more difficult to hear, muffled
as it has been by the engines of the US 5th Fleet which is based in
Bahrain as the guest of the Bahraini government. On the other hand,
assistance does buy the ability to suggest to government B (say Burma)
that it might want to resist the overtures of government C (say China).
In that particular example the USA is behind the curve because the
Burmese government only recently began to open up to most of the outside
world and Beijing has a head start.

<span id="chapter03.html#page_68"></span>However, when it comes to
Japan, Thailand, Vietnam, South Korea, Singapore, Malaysia, Indonesia
and others, the Americans are pushing at a door already open due to
those countries’ anxiety about their giant neighbour and keenness to
engage with Washington. They may all have issues with each other, but
those issues are dwarfed by the knowledge that if they do not stand
together they will be picked off one by one and eventually fall under
Chinese hegemony.

The USA is still in the opening phase of what in 2011 the then Secretary
of State Hillary Clinton called ‘the pivot to China’. It was an
interesting phrase, taken by some to mean the abandonment of Europe; but
a pivot towards one place does not mean the abandonment of another. It
is more a case of how much weight you put on which foot.

Many US government foreign policy strategists are persuaded that the
history of the twenty-first century will be written in Asia and the
Pacific. Half of the world’s population lives there, and if India is
included it is expected to account for half of global economic output by
2050.

Hence we will see the USA increasingly investing time and money in East
Asia to establish its presence and intentions in the region. For
example, in Northern Australia the Americans have set up a base for the
US Marine Corps. But in order to exert real influence, they may also
have to invest in limited military action to reassure their allies that
they will come to their rescue in the event of hostilities. For example,
if China begins shelling a Japanese destroyer and it looks as if they
might take further military action, the US Navy may have to fire warning
shots towards the Chinese navy, or even fire directly, to signal that it
is willing to go to war over the incident. Equally, when North Korea
fires at South Korea, the south fires back, but currently the US does
not. Instead it puts forces on alert in a public manner to send a
signal. If the situation escalated it would then fire warning shots at a
North Korean target, and finally, direct shots. It’s a way of escalating
without declaring war – and this is when things get dangerous.

<span id="chapter03.html#page_69"></span>The USA is seeking to
demonstrate to the whole region that it is in their best interests to
side with Washington – China is doing the opposite. So when challenged,
each side must react, because for each challenge it ducks, its allies’
confidence, and competitors’ fear, slowly drains away until eventually
there is an event which persuades a state to switch sides.

Analysts often write about the need for certain cultures not to lose
face, or ever be seen to back down, but this is not just a problem in
the Arab or East Asian cultures – it is a human problem expressed in
different ways. It may well be more defined and openly articulated in
those two cultures, but American foreign policy strategists are as aware
of the issue as any other power. The English language even has two
sayings which demonstrate how deeply ingrained the idea is: ‘Give them
an inch and they’ll take a mile’, and President Theodore Roosevelt’s
maxim of 1900 which has now entered the political lexicon: ‘Speak
softly, but carry a big stick.’

The deadly game in this century will be how the Chinese, Americans and
others in the region manage each crisis that arises without losing face,
and without building up a deep well of resentment and anger on both
sides.

The Cuban Missile Crisis is generally considered an American victory;
what is less publicised is that several months after Russia removed its
missiles from Cuba, the United States removed its Jupiter missiles
(which could reach Moscow) from Turkey. It was actually a compromise,
with both sides, eventually, able to tell their respective publics that
they had not capitulated.

In the twenty-first-century Pacific there are more great power
compromises to be made. In the short term most, but not all, are likely
to be made by the Chinese – an early example is Beijing’s declaration of
an Air Defence Identification Zone requiring foreign nations to inform
them before entering what is disputed territory, and the Americans
deliberately flying through it without telling them. The Chinese gained
something by <span id="chapter03.html#page_70"></span>declaring the zone
and making it an issue; the USA gained something by being seen not to
comply. It is a long game.

The US policy regarding the Japanese is to reassure them that they share
strategic interests vis-à-vis China and ensure that the US base in
Okinawa remains open. The Americans will assist the Japanese Self
Defence Force to be a robust body, but simultaneously restrict Japan’s
military ability to challenge the US in the Pacific.

While all the other countries in the region matter, in what is a
complicated diplomatic jigsaw puzzle, the key states look to be
Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore. These three sit astride the Strait of
Malacca, which at its narrowest is only 1.7 miles across. Every day
through that strait come 12 million barrels of oil heading for an
increasingly thirsty China and elsewhere in the region. As long as these
three countries are pro-American, the Americans have a key advantage.

On the plus side, the Chinese are not politically ideological, they do
not seek to spread Communism, nor do they covet (much) more territory in
the way the Russians did during the Cold War, and neither side is
looking for conflict. The Chinese can accept America guarding most of
the sea lanes which deliver Chinese goods to the world, so long as the
Americans accept that there will be limits to just how close to China
that control extends.

There will be arguments, and nationalism will be used to ensure the
unity of the Chinese people from time to time, but each side will be
seeking compromise. The danger comes if they misread each other and/ or
gamble too much.

There are flashpoints. The Americans have a treaty with Taiwan which
states that if the Chinese invade what they regard as their 23rd
province, the USA will go to war. A red line for China, which could
spark an invasion, is formal recognition of Taiwan by the USA, or a
declaration of independence by Taiwan. However, there is no sign of
that, and a Chinese invasion cannot be seen on this side of the horizon.

<span id="chapter03.html#page_71"></span>As China’s thirst for foreign
oil and gas grows, so that of the United States declines. This will have
a huge impact on its foreign relations, especially in the Middle East,
with knock-on effects for other countries.

Due to offshore drilling in US coastal waters, and underground fracking
across huge regions of the country, America looks destined to become not
just self-sufficient in energy, but a net exporter of energy by 2020.
This will mean that its focus on ensuring a flow of oil and gas from the
Gulf region will diminish. It will still have strategic interests there,
but the focus will no longer be so intense. If American attention wanes,
the Gulf nations will seek new alliances. One candidate will be Iran,
another China, but that will only happen when the Chinese have built
their Blue Water navy and, equally importantly, are prepared to deploy
it.

The US 5th Fleet is not about to sail away from its port in Bahrain –
that is a piece of concrete it would give up reluctantly. However, if
the energy supplies of Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, the UAE and Qatar are no
longer required to keep American lights on, and cars on the road, the
American public and Congress will ask, what is it there for? If the
response is ‘to check Iran’ it may not be enough to quash the debate.

Elsewhere in the Middle East, US policy in the short term is to prevent
Iran from becoming too strong whilst at the same time reaching for what
is known as the ‘grand bargain’ – an agreement settling the many issues
which divide the two countries, and ending three and a half decades of
enmity. With the Arab nations embarking on what may be a decades-long
struggle with armed Islamists, Washington looks as if it has given up on
the optimistic idea of encouraging Jeffersonian democracies to emerge,
and will concentrate on attempting to manage the situation whilst at the
same time desperately trying not to get sand on the boots of US
soldiers.

The close relationship with Israel may cool, albeit slowly, as the
demographics of the USA change. The children of the Hispanic and Asian
<span id="chapter03.html#page_72"></span>immigrants now arriving in the
United States will be more interested in Latin America and the Far East
than in a tiny country on the edge of a region no longer vital to
American interests.

The policy in Latin America will be to ensure that the Panama Canal
remains open, to enquire about the rates to pass through the proposed
Nicaraguan canal to the Pacific, and to keep an eye on the rise of
Brazil in case it gets any ideas about its influence in the Caribbean
Sea.

In Africa, the Americans are but one nation seeking the continent’s
natural wealth, but the nation finding most of it is China. As in the
Middle East, the USA will watch the Islamist struggle in North Africa
with interest but try not to get involved much closer than 30,000 feet
above the ground.

America’s experiment with nation-building overseas appears to be over.

In Iraq, Afghanistan and elsewhere, the USA underestimated the mentality
and strength of small powers and of tribes. The Americans’ own history
of physical security and unity may have led them to overestimate the
power of their democratic rationalist argument, which believes that
compromise, hard work and even voting would triumph over atavistic,
deep-seated historical fears of ‘the other’, be they Sunni, Shia, Kurd,
Arab, Muslim or Christian. They assumed people would want to come
together whereas in fact many dare not try and would prefer to live
apart because of their experiences. It is a sad reflection upon
humanity, but it appears throughout many periods of history, and in many
places, to be an unfortunate truth. The American actions took the lid
off a simmering pot which had temporarily hidden that truth.

This does not make American policymakers ‘naive’, as some of the
snootier European diplomats like to believe; but they do have a ‘can do’
and a ‘can fix’ attitude which inevitably will not always work.

For thirty years it has been fashionable to predict the imminent or
ongoing decline of the USA. This is as wrong now as it was in the past.
<span id="chapter03.html#page_73"></span>The planet’s most successful
country is about to become self-sufficient in energy, it remains the
pre-eminent economic power and it spends more on research and
development for its military than the overall military budget of all the
other NATO countries combined. Its population is not ageing as in Europe
and Japan, and a 2013 Gallup study showed that 25 per cent of all people
hoping to emigrate put the USA as their first choice of destination. In
the same year Shanghai University listed what its experts judged the top
twenty universities of the world: seventeen were in the USA.

The Prussian statesman Otto von Bismarck, in a double-edged remark, said
more than a century ago that ‘God takes special care of drunks, children
and the United States of America.’ It appears still to be true.

<span id="chapter04.html"></span>

<span id="chapter04.html#page_74"></span><span id="chapter04.html#page_75"></span>CHAPTER 4 []
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**WESTERN EUROPE** []
------------------

 

*‘Here the past was everywhere, an entire  
continent sown with memories.’*

Miranda Richmond Mouillot, *A Fifty-Year Silence:  
Love, War and a Ruined House in France*

<span id="chapter04.html#page_76"></span><span
id="chapter04.html#page_77"></span>![illustration](media/prisoners-of-geography-assets/images/f0076-01.png)

 

<span id="chapter04.html#page_78"></span><span
class="big">T</span><small>HE MODERN WORLD, FOR BETTER OR WORSE, SPRINGS
FROM</small> Europe. This western outpost of the great Eurasian land
mass gave birth to the Enlightenment, which led to the Industrial
Revolution, which has resulted in what we now see around us every day.
For that we can give thanks to, or blame, Europe’s location.

The climate, fed by the Gulf Stream, blessed the region with the right
amount of rainfall to cultivate crops on a large scale, and the right
type of soil for them to flourish in. This allowed for population growth
in an area in which, for most, work was possible all year round, even in
the heights of summer. Winter actually adds a bonus, with temperatures
warm enough to work in but cold enough to kill off many of the germs
which to this day plague huge parts of the rest of the world.

Good harvests mean surplus food that can be traded; this in turn builds
up trading centres which become towns. It also allows people to think of
more than just growing food and turn their attention to ideas and
technology.

Western Europe has no real deserts, the frozen wastes are confined to a
few areas in the far north, and earthquakes, volcanoes and massive
flooding are rare. The rivers are long, flat, navigable and made for
trade. As they empty into a variety of seas and oceans they flow into
coastlines which are, west, north and south, abundant in natural
harbours.

If you are reading this trapped in a snowstorm in the Alps, or waiting
for flood waters to subside back into the Danube, then Europe’s
geographical blessings may not seem too apparent; but, relative to many
places, blessings they are. These are the factors which led to the
Europeans <span id="chapter04.html#page_79"></span>creating the first
industrialised nation states, which in turn led them to be the first to
conduct industrial-scale war.

If we take Europe as a whole we see the mountains, rivers and valleys
that explain why there are so many nation states. Unlike the USA, in
which one dominant language and culture pressed rapidly and violently
ever westward, creating a giant country, Europe grew organically over
millennia and remains divided between its geographical and linguistic
regions.

The various tribes of the Iberian Peninsula, for example, prevented from
expanding north into France by the presence of the Pyrenees, gradually
came together over thousands of years to form Spain and Portugal – and
even Spain is not an entirely united country, with Catalonia
increasingly vocal about wanting its independence. France has also been
formed by natural barriers, framed as it is by the Pyrenees, the Alps,
the Rhine and the Atlantic Ocean.

Europe’s major rivers do not meet (unless you count the Sava, which
drains into the Danube in Belgrade). This partly explains why there are
so many countries in what is a relatively small space. Because they do
not connect, most of the rivers act, at some point, as boundaries, and
each is a sphere of economic influence in its own right; this gave rise
to at least one major urban development on the banks of each river, some
of which in turn became capital cities.

Europe’s second-longest river, the Danube (1,780 miles), is a case in
point. It rises in Germany’s Black Forest and flows south on its way to
the Black Sea. In all, the Danube basin affects eighteen countries and
forms natural borders along the way, including those of Slovakia and
Hungary, Croatia and Serbia, Serbia and Romania, and Romania and
Bulgaria. Over 2,000 years ago it was one of the borders of the Roman
Empire, which in turn helped it to become one of the great trading
routes of medieval times and gave rise to the present capital cities of
Vienna, Bratislava, Budapest and Belgrade. It also formed the natural
border of two subsequent empires, the Austro-Hungarian and the Ottoman.
As each shrank, the nations emerged again, eventually becoming nation
states. However, the geography of the Danube region, especially at its
southern end, helps explain why there are so many small nations there in
comparison to the bigger countries in and around the North European
Plain.

<span
id="chapter04.html#page_80"></span>![illustration](media/prisoners-of-geography-assets/images/f0080-01.png)

The Danube Basin illustrates the geographical advantages of the terrain
in Europe; interconnected rivers on a flat plain provided natural
borders and an easily navigable transport network that encouraged a
booming trade system.

The countries of northern Europe have been richer than those of the
south for several centuries. The north industrialised earlier than the
south and so has been more economically successful. As many of the
northern countries comprise the heartland of Western Europe, their trade
links were easier to maintain, and one wealthy neighbour could trade
with another – whereas the Spanish, for example, either had to <span
id="chapter04.html#page_81"></span>cross the Pyrenees to trade, or look
to the limited markets of Portugal and North Africa.

There are also unprovable theories that the domination of Catholicism in
the south has held it back, whereas the Protestant work ethic propelled
the northern countries to greater heights. Each time I visit the
Bavarian city of Munich I reflect on this theory, and while driving past
the gleaming temples of the headquarters of BMW, Allianz and Siemens
have cause to doubt it. In Germany 34 per cent of the population is
Catholic, and Bavaria itself is predominantly Catholic, yet their
religious predilections do not appear to have influenced either their
progress or their insistence that Greeks work harder and pay more taxes.

The contrast between northern and southern Europe is also at least
partly attributable to the fact that the south has fewer coastal plains
suitable for agriculture, and has suffered more from drought and natural
disasters than the north, albeit on a lesser scale than in other parts
of the world. As we saw in [Chapter One](#chapter01.html), the North
European Plain is a corridor that stretches from France to the Ural
Mountains in Russia, bordered to the north by the North and Baltic seas.
The land allows for successful farming on a massive scale, and the
waterways enable the crops and other goods to be moved easily.

Of all the countries in the plain, France was best situated to take
advantage of it. France is the only European country to be both a
northern and southern power. It contains the largest expanse of fertile
land in Western Europe, and many of its rivers connect with each other;
one flows west all the way to the Atlantic (the Seine), another south to
the Mediterranean (the Rhône). These factors, together with its relative
flatness, lent themselves to unification of regions, and – especially
from the time of Napoleon – centralisation of power.

But to the south and west many countries remain in the second tier of
European power, partially because of their location. The south of Italy,
for example, is still well behind the north in terms of development,
<span id="chapter04.html#page_82"></span>and although it has been a
unified state (including Venice and Rome) since 1871, the strains of the
rift between north and south are greater now than they have been since
before the Second World War. The heavy industry, tourism and financial
centres of the north have long meant a higher standard of living there,
leading to the formation of political parties agitating for cutting
state subsidies to the south, or even breaking away from it.

Spain is also struggling, and has always struggled because of its
geography. Its narrow coastal plains have poor soil, and access to
markets is hindered internally by its short rivers and the Meseta
Central, a highland plateau surrounded by mountain ranges, some of which
cut through it. Trade with Western Europe is further hampered by the
Pyrenees, and any markets to its south on the other side of the
Mediterranean are in developing countries with limited income. It was
left behind after the Second World War, as under the Franco dictatorship
it was politically frozen out of much of modern Europe. Franco died in
1975 and the newly democratic Spain joined the EU in 1986. By the 1990s
it had begun to catch up with the rest of Western Europe, but its
inherent geographical and financial weaknesses continue to hold it back
and have intensified the problems of overspending and loose central
fiscal control. It has been among the countries hit worst by the 2008
economic crisis.

Greece suffers similarly. Much of the Greek coastline comprises steep
cliffs and there are few coastal plains for agriculture. Inland are more
steep cliffs, rivers which will not allow transportation, and few wide,
fertile valleys. What agricultural land there is is of high quality; the
problem is that there is too little of it to allow Greece to become a
major agricultural exporter, or to develop more than a handful of major
urban areas containing highly educated, highly skilled and
technologically advanced populations. Its situation is further
exacerbated by its location, with Athens positioned at the tip of a
peninsula, almost cut off from land trade with Europe. It is reliant on
the Aegean Sea for access to maritime <span
id="chapter04.html#page_83"></span>trade in the region – but across that
sea lies Turkey, a large potential enemy. Greece fought several wars
against Turkey in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, and
in modern times still spends a vast amount of euros, which it doesn’t
have, on defence.

The mainland is protected by mountains, but there are about 1,400 Greek
islands (6,000 if you include various rocks sticking out of the Aegean)
of which about 200 are inhabited. It takes a decent navy just to patrol
this territory, never mind one strong enough to deter any attempt to
take them over. The result is a huge cost in military spending that
Greece cannot afford. During the Cold War the Americans, and to a lesser
extent the British, were content to underwrite some of the military
requirements in order to keep the Soviet Union out of the Aegean and the
Mediterranean. When the Cold War ended, so did the cheques. But Greece
kept spending.

This historical split continues to have an impact to this day in the
wake of the financial crash that hit Europe in 2008 and the ideological
rift in the Eurozone. In 2012, when the bailouts began and demands for
austerity measures were made, the geographical divide soon became
obvious. The donors and demanders were the northern countries, the
recipients and supplicants mostly southern. It didn’t take long for
people in Germany to point out that they were working until sixty-five
but paying taxes which were going to Greece so that people could retire
at fifty-five. They then asked – why? And the answer, ‘in sickness and
in health’, was unsatisfactory.

The Germans led the bailout-imposed austerity measures, the Greeks led
the backlash. For example, the German Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble
commented that he was ‘not yet sure that all political parties in Greece
are aware of their responsibility for the difficult situation their
country is in’. To which the Greek president, Karolos Papoulias, who had
fought the Nazis, replied, ‘I cannot accept Mr Schäuble insulting my
country . . . Who is Mr Schäuble to insult Greece? Who are the Dutch?
<span id="chapter04.html#page_84"></span>Who are the Finnish?’ He also
made a pointed reference to the Second World War: ‘We were always proud
to defend not only our freedom, our country, but Europe’s freedom too.’
The stereotypes of profligate, slack southerners and careful,
industrious northerners soon resurfaced with the Greek media responding
with constant and crude reminders of Germany’s past, including
superimposing a Hitler moustache on a frontpage photograph of Chancellor
Merkel.

The Greek taxpayer – of whom there are not enough to sustain the
country’s economy – has a very different view, asking: ‘Why should the
Germans dictate to us, when the euro benefits them more than anyone
else?’ In Greece and elsewhere austerity measures imposed from the north
are seen as an assault on sovereignty.

Cracks are appearing in the edifice of the ‘family of Europe’. On the
periphery of Western Europe the financial crisis has left Greece looking
like a semi-detached member; to the east it has again seen conflict. If
the aberration of the past seventy years of peace is to continue through
this century, that peace will need love, care and attention.

The post-Second-World-War generations have grown up with peace as the
norm, but what is different about the current generation is that
Europeans find it difficult to imagine the opposite. Wars now seem to be
what happens elsewhere or in the past – at worst they happen on the
‘periphery’ of Europe. The trauma of two world wars, followed by seven
decades of peace and then the collapse of the Soviet Union, persuaded
many people that Western Europe was a ‘post-conflict’ region.

There are reasons to believe that this may still hold true in the
future, but potential sources of conflict bubble under the surface, and
the tension between the Europeans and the Russians may result in a
confrontation. For example, history and geographical shape-shifting
haunts Polish foreign policy even if the country is currently at peace,
successful and one of the bigger EU states, with a population of 38
million. It is also physically one of the larger members and its economy
has doubled since <span id="chapter04.html#page_85"></span>it emerged
from behind the Iron Curtain, but still it looks to the past as it tries
to secure its future.

The corridor of the North European Plain is at its narrowest between
Poland’s Baltic coast in the north and the beginning of the Carpathian
Mountains in the south. This is where, from a Russian military
perspective, the best defensive line could be placed or, from an
attacker’s viewpoint, the point at which its forces would be squeezed
together before breaking out towards Russia.

The Poles have seen it both ways as armies have swept east and west
across it, frequently changing borders. If you take *The Times Atlas of
European History* and flick through the pages quickly as if it were a
flip-book, you see Poland emerge *c*.1000, then continually change
shape, disappear and reappear before assuming its present form in the
late twentieth century.

The location of Germany and Russia, coupled with the Poles’ experience
of these two countries, does not make either a natural ally for Warsaw.
Like France, Poland wants to keep Germany locked inside the EU and NATO,
while not-so-ancient fears of Russia have come to the fore with the
crisis in Ukraine. Over the centuries Poland has seen the Russian tide
ebb and flow from and to them. After the low tide at the end of the
Soviet (Russian) empire, there was only one direction it could
subsequently flow.

Relations with Britain, as a counterweight to Germany within the EU,
came easily despite the betrayal of 1939: Britain and France had signed
a treaty guaranteeing to come to Poland’s aid if Germany invaded. When
the attack came the response to the Blitzkrieg was a ‘Sitzkrieg’ – both
Allies sat behind the Maginot Line in France as Poland was swallowed up.
Despite this, relations with the UK are strong, even if the main ally
the newly liberated Poland sought out in 1989 was the USA.

The Americans embraced the Poles and vice versa: both had the Russians
in mind. In 1999 Poland joined NATO, extending the Alliance’s <span
id="chapter04.html#page_86"></span>reach 400 miles closer to Moscow. By
then several other former Warsaw Pact countries were also members of the
Alliance and in 1999 Moscow watched helplessly as NATO went to war with
its ally, Serbia. In the 1990s Russia was in no position to push back,
but after the chaos of the Yeltsin years Putin stepped in on the front
foot and came out swinging.

The best-known quote attributed to Henry Kissinger originated in the
1970s, when he is reported to have asked: ‘If I want to phone Europe –
who do I call?’ The Poles have an updated question: ‘If the Russians
threaten, do we call Brussels or Washington?’ They know the answer.

The Balkan countries are also once again free of empire. Their
mountainous terrain led to the emergence of so many small states in the
region, and is one of the things that has kept them from integrating –
despite the best efforts of the experiment of the Union of Southern
Slavs, otherwise known as Yugoslavia.

With the wars of the 1990s behind them, most of the former Yugoslav
countries are looking westward, but in Serbia the pull of the east, with
its Orthodox religion and Slavic peoples, remains strong. Russia, which
has yet to forgive the Western nations for the bombing of Serbia in 1999
and the separation of Kosovo, is still attempting to coax Serbia into
its orbit via the gravitational pull of language, ethnicity, religion
and energy deals.

Bismarck famously said that a major war would be sparked by ‘some damned
fool thing in the Balkans’; and so it came to pass. The region is now an
economic and diplomatic battleground with the EU, NATO, the Turks and
the Russians all vying for influence. Albania, Bulgaria, Croatia and
Romania have made their choice and are inside NATO – and, apart from
Albania, are also in the EU, as is Slovenia.

The tensions extend into the north and Scandinavia. Denmark is already a
NATO member and the recent resurgence of Russia has caused a debate in
Sweden over whether it is time to abandon the neutrality of two
centuries and join the Alliance. In 2013 Russian jets staged a mock
<span id="chapter04.html#page_87"></span>bombing run on Sweden in the
middle of the night. The Swedish defence system appears to have been
asleep, failing to scramble any jets, and it was the Danish air force
that took to the skies to shepherd the Russians away. Despite that, the
majority of Swedes remain against NATO membership, but the debate is
ongoing, informed by Moscow’s statement that it would be forced to
‘respond’ if either Sweden or Finland were to join the Alliance.

The EU and NATO countries need to present a united front to these
challenges, but this will be impossible unless the key relationship in
the EU remains intact – that between France and Germany.

As we’ve seen, France was best placed to take advantage of Europe’s
climate, trade routes and natural borders. It is partially protected,
except in one area – the north-east, at the point where the flatland of
the North European Plain becomes what is now Germany. Before Germany
existed as a single country this was not a problem. France was a
considerable distance from Russia, far from the Mongol hordes, and had
the Channel between it and England, meaning that an attempt at a
full-scale invasion and total occupation could probably be repulsed. In
fact France was the pre-eminent power on the Continent: it could even
project its power as far as the gates of Moscow.

But then Germany united.

It had been doing so for some time. There had been the ‘idea’ of Germany
for centuries: the Eastern Frankish lands which became the Holy Roman
Empire in the tenth century were sometimes called ‘the Germanies’,
comprising as they did up to 500 Germanic mini-kingdoms. After the Holy
Roman Empire was dissolved in 1806 the German Confederation of
thirty-nine statelets came together in 1815 at the Congress of Vienna.
This in turn led to the North German Confederation, and then the
unification of Germany in 1871 after the Franco-Prussian War in which
victorious German troops occupied Paris. Now France had a neighbour on
its border that was geographically larger than itself, with <span
id="chapter04.html#page_88"></span>a similar size of population but one
with a better growth rate, and that was more industrialised.

The unification was announced at the Palace of Versailles near Paris
after the German victory. The weak spot in the French defence, the North
European Plain, had been breached. It would be again, twice, in the
following seventy years, after which France would use diplomacy instead
of warfare to try to neutralise the threat from the east.

Germany had always had bigger geographical problems than France. The
flatlands of the North European Plain gave it two reasons to be fearful:
to the west the Germans saw their long-unified and powerful neighbour
France, and to the east the giant Russian Bear. Their ultimate fear was
of a simultaneous attack by both powers across the flat land of the
corridor. We can never know if it would have happened, but the fear of
it had catastrophic consequences.

France feared Germany, Germany feared France, and when France joined
both Russia and Britain in the Triple Entente of 1907, Germany feared
all three. There was now also the added dimension that the British navy
could, at a time of its choosing, blockade German access to the North
Sea and the Atlantic. Its solution, twice, was to attack France first.

The dilemma of Germany’s geographical position and belligerence became
known as ‘the German Question’. The answer, after the horrors of the
Second World War, indeed after centuries of war, was the acceptance of
the presence in the European lands of a single overwhelming power, the
USA, which set up NATO and allowed for the eventual creation of the
European Union. Exhausted by war, and with safety ‘guaranteed’ by the
American military, the Europeans embarked on an astonishing experiment.
They were asked to trust each other.

What is now the EU was set up so that France and Germany could hug each
other so tightly in a loving embrace that neither would be able to get
an arm free with which to punch the other. It has worked brilliantly
<span id="chapter04.html#page_89"></span>and created a huge geographical
space now encompassing the biggest economy in the world.

It has worked particularly well for Germany, which rose from the ashes
of 1945 and used to its advantage the geography it once feared. It
became Europe’s great manufacturer. Instead of sending armies across the
flatlands it sent goods with the prestigious tag ‘Made in Germany’, and
these goods flowed down the Rhine and the Elbe, along the autobahns and
out into Europe and the world, north, south, west and, increasingly
since 1990, east.

However, what began in 1951 as the six-nation European Steel and Coal
Community has become the twenty-eight-nation EU with an ideological core
of ‘ever closer union’. After the first major financial crisis to hit
the Union, that ideology is on an uncertain footing and the ties that
bind are fraying. There are signs within the EU of, as the geopolitical
writer Robert Kaplan puts it, ‘the revenge of geography’.

Ever closer union led, for nineteen of the twenty-eight countries, to a
single currency – the euro. All twenty-eight members, except for Denmark
and the UK, are committed to joining it if and when they meet the
criteria. What is clear now, and was to some clear at the time, is that
at its launch in 1999 many countries which did join were simply not
ready.

In 1999 many of the countries went into the newly defined relationship
with eyes wide shut. They were all supposed to have levels of debt,
unemployment and inflation within certain limits. The problem was that
some, notably Greece, were cooking the books. Most of the experts knew,
but because the euro is not just a currency – it is also an ideology –
the members turned a blind eye.

The Eurozone countries agreed to be economically wedded, as the Greeks
point out, ‘in sickness and in health’, but when the economic crisis of
2008 hit, the wealthier countries had to bail out the poorer ones, and a
bitter domestic row broke out. The partners are still throwing dishes at
each other to this day.

<span id="chapter04.html#page_90"></span>The euro crisis and wider
economic problems have revealed the cracks in the House of Europe
(notably along the old fault line of the north–south divide). The dream
of ever closer union appears to be frozen, or possibly even in reverse.
If it is, then the German question may return. Seen through the prism of
seven decades of peace, this may seem alarmist, and Germany is among the
most peaceful and democratic members of the European family; but seen
through the prism of seven centuries of European warfare, it cannot be
ruled out.

Germany is determined to remain a good European. Germans know
instinctively that if the Union fragments the old fears of Germany will
reappear, especially as it is now by far the most populous and wealthy
European nation, with 82 million inhabitants and the world’s
fourth-biggest economy. A failed Union would also harm Germany
economically: the world’s third-largest exporter of goods does not want
to see its closest market fragment into protectionism.

The German nation state, despite being less than 150 years old, is now
Europe’s indispensable power. In economic affairs it is unrivalled, it
speaks quietly but carries a large euro-shaped stick, and the Continent
listens. However, on global foreign policy it simply speaks quietly,
sometimes not at all, and has an aversion to sticks.

The shadow of the Second World War still hangs over Germany. The
Americans, and eventually the West Europeans were willing to accept
German rearmament due to the Soviet threat, but Germany rearmed almost
reluctantly and has been loath to use its military strength. It played a
walk-on part in Kosovo and Afghanistan, but chose to sit out the Libya
conflict.

Its most serious diplomatic foray into a non-economic crisis has been in
Ukraine, which tells us a lot about where Germany is now looking. The
Germans were involved in the machinations that overthrew Ukraine’s
President Yanukovych in 2014 and they were sharply critical of Russia’s
subsequent annexation of Crimea. However, mindful of the gas pipelines,
Berlin was noticeably more restrained in its criticism and <span
id="chapter04.html#page_91"></span>support for sanctions than, for
example, the UK, which is far less reliant on Russian energy. Through
the EU and NATO Germany is anchored in Western Europe, but in stormy
weather anchors can slip, and Berlin is geographically situated to shift
the focus of its attention east if required and forge much closer ties
with Moscow.

Watching all of these Continental machinations from the sidelines of the
Atlantic is the UK, sometimes present on the territory of the Continent,
sometimes in ‘splendid isolation’, always fully engaged in ensuring that
no power greater than it will rise in Europe. This is as true now in the
diplomatic chambers of the EU as it was on the battlefields of
Agincourt, Waterloo or Balaclava.

When it can, the UK inserts itself between the great Franco-German
alliances in the EU; failing that, it seeks alliances among other,
smaller, member states to build enough votes to challenge policies with
which it disagrees.

Geographically, the Brits are in a good place. Good farmland, decent
rivers, excellent access to the seas and their fish stocks, close enough
to the European Continent to trade and yet protected by dint of being an
island race – there have been times when the UK gave thanks for its
geography as wars and revolutions swept over its neighbours.

The British losses in, and experience of, the world wars are not to be
underestimated, but they are dwarfed by what happened in Continental
Europe in the twentieth century and indeed before that. The British are
at one remove from living with the historical collective memory of
frequent invasions and border changes.

There is a theory that the relative security of the UK over the past few
hundred years is why it has experienced more freedom and less despotism
than the countries across the Channel. The theory goes that there were
fewer requirements for ‘strong men’ or dictators which, starting with
the Magna Carta (1215) and then the Provisions of Oxford (1258), led to
forms of democracy years ahead of other countries.

<span id="chapter04.html#page_92"></span>It is a good talking point,
albeit one not provable. What is undeniable is that the water around the
island, the trees upon it which allowed a great navy to be built, and
the economic conditions which sparked the Industrial Revolution all led
to Great Britain controlling a global empire. Britain may be the biggest
island in Europe, but it is not a large country. The expansion of its
power across the globe in the eighteenth, nineteenth and twentieth
centuries is remarkable, even if its position has since declined.

Its location still grants it certain strategic advantages, one of which
is the GIUK (Greenland, Iceland and the UK) gap. This is a choke point
in the world’s sea lanes – it is hardly as important as the Strait of
Hormuz or the Strait of Malacca, but it has traditionally given the UK
an advantage in the North Atlantic. The alternative route for north
European navies (including Belgium, the Netherlands and France) to
access the Atlantic is through the English Channel, but this is narrow –
only 20 miles across at the Strait of Dover – and very well defended.
Any Russian naval ship coming from the Arctic also has to pass through
the GIUK on its way to the Atlantic.

This strategic advantage has diminished in tandem with the reduced role
and power of the Royal Navy, but in time of war it would again benefit
the UK. The GIUK is one of many reasons why London flew into a panic in
2014 when, briefly, the vote on Scottish independence looked as if might
result in a Yes. The loss of power in the North Sea and North Atlantic
would have been a strategic blow and a massive dent to the prestige of
whatever was left of the UK.

What the British have now is a collective memory of greatness. That
memory is what persuades many people on the island that if something in
the world needs to be done, then Britain should be among the countries
which do it. The British remain within Europe, and yet outside it; it is
an issue still to be settled.

NATO is fraying at the edges at the same time as is the European <span
id="chapter04.html#page_93"></span>Union. Both can be patched up, but if
not then over time they may become either defunct or irrelevant. At this
point we would return to a Europe of sovereign nation states, with each
state seeking alliances in a balance of power system. The Germans would
again be fearing encirclement by the Russians and French, the French
would again be fearing their bigger neighbour, and we would all be back
at the beginning of the twentieth century.

For the French this is a nightmare. They successfully helped tie Germany
down inside the EU, only to find that after German reunification they
became the junior partner in a twin-engine motor they had hoped to be
driving. This poses Paris a problem it does not appear to be able to
solve. Unless it quietly accepts that Berlin calls the European shots,
it risks further weakening the Union. But if it accepts German
leadership, then its own power is diminished.

France is capable of an independent foreign policy – indeed, with its
‘Force de frappe’ nuclear deterrent, its overseas territories and its
aircraft carrier-backed armed forces, it does just that – but it
operates safe in the knowledge that its eastern flank is secure and it
can afford to raise its eyes to the horizon.

Both France and Germany are currently working to keep the Union
together: they see each other now as natural partners. But only Germany
has a Plan B – Russia.

The end of the Cold War saw most of the Continental powers reducing
their military budgets and cutting back their armed forces. It has taken
the shock of the Russian–Georgian war of 2008 and the annexation of
Crimea by Russia in 2014 to focus attention on the possibility of the
age-old problem of war in Europe.

Now the Russians regularly fly missions aimed at testing European air
defence systems and are busy consolidating themselves in South Ossetia,
Abkhazia, Crimea, Transnistria and eastern Ukraine. They maintain their
links with the ethnic Russians in the Baltics, and they still have their
exclave of Kaliningrad on the Baltic Sea.

<span id="chapter04.html#page_94"></span>The Europeans have begun doing
some serious recalculation on their military spending, but there isn’t
much money around, and they face difficult decisions. While they debate
those decisions the maps are being dusted down, and the diplomats and
military strategists see that, while the threats of Charlemagne,
Napoleon, Hitler and the Soviets may have vanished, the North European
Plain, the Carpathians, the Baltic and the North Sea are still there.

In his book *Of Paradise and Power* the historian Robert Kagan argues
that Western Europeans live in paradise but shouldn’t seek to operate by
the rules of paradise once they move out into the world of power.
Perhaps, as the euro crisis diminishes and we look around at paradise,
it seems inconceivable that we could go backwards; but history tells us
how much things can change in just a few decades, and geography tells us
that if humans do not constantly strive to overcome its ‘rules’, its
‘rules’ will overcome us.

This is what Helmut Kohl meant when he warned, upon leaving the
Chancellorship of Germany in 1998, that he was the last German leader to
have lived through the Second World War and thus to have experienced the
horrors it wrought. In 2012 he wrote an article for Germany’s
best-selling daily newspaper, *Bild*, and was clearly still haunted by
the possibility that because of the financial crisis the current
generation of leaders would not nurture the post-war experiment in
European trust: ‘For those who didn’t live through this themselves and
who especially now in the crisis are asking what benefits Europe’s unity
brings, the answer despite the unprecedented European period of peace
lasting more than 65 years and despite the problems and difficulties we
must still overcome is: peace.’

<span id="chapter05.html"></span>

<span id="chapter05.html#page_95"></span>CHAPTER 5 []
--------------------------------------------------

**AFRICA** []
----------

 

*‘It always seems impossible until it is done.’*  
Nelson Mandela

<span id="chapter05.html#page_96"></span><span
id="chapter05.html#page_97"></span>![illustration](media/prisoners-of-geography-assets/images/f0096-01.png)

 

<span id="chapter05.html#page_98"></span><span
class="big">A</span><small>FRICA’S COASTLINE? GREAT BEACHES, REALLY,
REALLY LOVELY</small> beaches, but terrible natural harbours. Rivers?
Amazing rivers, but most of them are rubbish for actually transporting
anything, given that every few miles you go over a waterfall. These are
just two in a long list of problems which help explain why Africa isn’t
technologically or politically as successful as Western Europe or North
America.

There are lots of places that are unsuccessful, but few have been as
unsuccessful as Africa, and that despite having a head start as the
place where *Homo sapiens* originated about 200,000 years ago. As that
most lucid of writers, Jared Diamond, put it in a brilliant *National
Geographic* article in 2005, ‘It’s the opposite of what one would expect
from the runner first off the block.’ However, the first runners became
separated from everyone else by the Sahara Desert and the Indian and
Atlantic oceans. Almost the entire continent developed in isolation from
the Eurasian land mass, where ideas and technology were exchanged from
east to west, and west to east, but not north to south.

Africa, being a huge continent, has always consisted of different
regions, climates and cultures, but what they all had in common was
their isolation from each other and the outside world. That is less the
case now, but the legacy remains.

The world’s idea of African geography is flawed. Few people realise just
how big it is. This is because most of us use the standard Mercator
world map. This, as do other maps, depicts a sphere on a flat surface
and thus distorts shapes. Africa is far, far longer than usually
portrayed, which explains what an achievement it was to round the Cape
of Good <span id="chapter05.html#page_99"></span>Hope, and is a reminder
of the importance of the Suez Canal to world trade. Making it around the
Cape was a momentous achievement, but once it became unnecessary to do
so, the sea journey from Western Europe to India was reduced by 6,000
miles.

If you look at a world map and mentally glue Alaska onto California,
then turn the USA on its head, it appears as if it would roughly fit
into Africa with a few gaps here and there. In fact Africa is three
times bigger than the USA. Look again at the standard Mercator map and
you see that Greenland appears to be the same size as Africa, and yet
Africa is actually fourteen times the size of Greenland! You could fit
the USA, Greenland, India, China, Spain, France, Germany and the UK into
Africa and still have room for most of Eastern Europe. We know Africa is
a massive land mass, but the maps rarely tell us how massive.

The geography of this immense continent can be explained in several
ways, but the most basic is to think of Africa in terms of the top third
and bottom two-thirds.

The top third begins on the Mediterranean coastlines of the North
African Arabic-speaking countries. The coastal plains quickly become the
Sahara, the world’s largest dry desert, which is almost as big as the
USA. Directly below the Sahara is the Sahel region, a semi-arid,
rock-strewn, sandy strip of land measuring more than 3,000 miles at its
widest points and stretching from Gambia on the Atlantic coast through
Niger, Chad and right across to Eritrea on the Red Sea. The word Sahel
comes from the Arabic *sahil*, which means coast, and is how the people
living in the region think of it – as the shoreline of the vast sand sea
of the Sahara. It is another sort of shore, one where the influence of
Islam diminishes. From the Sahel to the Mediterranean the vast majority
of people are Muslims. South of it there is far more diversity in
religion.

Indeed, south of the Sahel, in the bottom two-thirds of Africa, there is
more diversity in most things. The land becomes more temperate and green
vegetation appears, which becomes jungle as we approach Congo <span
id="chapter05.html#page_100"></span>and the Central African Republic.
Towards the east coast are the great lakes in Uganda and Tanzania, while
across to the west more deserts appear in Angola and Namibia. By the
time we reach the tip of South Africa the climate is again
‘Mediterranean’, even though we have travelled almost 5,000 miles from
the northernmost point in Tunisia on the Mediterranean coast.

Given that Africa is where humans originated, we are all African.
However, the rules of the race changed *c*.8000 <small>BCE</small> when
some of us, who’d wandered off to places such as the Middle East and
around the Mediterranean region, lost the wanderlust, settled down,
began farming and eventually congregated in villages and towns.

But back south there were few plants willing to be domesticated, and
even fewer animals. Much of the land consists of jungle, swamp, desert
or steep-sided plateau, none of which lend themselves to the growing of
wheat or rice, or sustaining herds of sheep. Africa’s rhinos, gazelles
and giraffes stubbornly refused to be beasts of burden – or as Diamond
puts it in a memorable passage, ‘History might have turned out
differently if African armies, fed by barnyard-giraffe meat and backed
by waves of cavalry mounted on huge rhinos, had swept into Europe to
overrun its mutton-fed soldiers mounted on puny horses.’ But Africa’s
head start in our mutual story did allow it more time to develop
something else which to this day holds it back: a virulent set of
diseases, such as malaria and yellow fever, brought on by the heat and
now complicated by crowded living conditions and poor healthcare
infrastructure. This is true of other regions – the subcontinent and
South America, for example – but sub-Saharan Africa has been especially
hard hit, for example by the HIV virus, and has a particular problem
because of the prevalence of the mosquito and the Tsetse fly.

Most of the continent’s rivers also pose a problem, as they begin in
high land and descend in abrupt drops which thwart navigation. For
example, the mighty Zambezi may be Africa’s fourth-longest river, <span
id="chapter05.html#page_101"></span>running for 1,600 miles, and may be
a stunning tourist attraction with its white-water rapids and the
Victoria Falls, but as a trade route it is of little use. It flows
through six countries, dropping from 4,900 feet to sea level when it
reaches the Indian Ocean in Mozambique. Parts of it are navigable by
shallow boats, but these parts do not interconnect, thus limiting the
transportation of cargo.

Unlike in Europe, which has the Danube and the Rhine, this drawback has
hindered contact and trade between regions – which in turn affected
economic development, and hindered the formation of large trading
regions. The continent’s great rivers, the Niger, the Congo, the
Zambezi, the Nile and others, don’t connect and this disconnection has a
human factor. Whereas huge areas of Russia, China and the USA speak a
unifying language which helps trade, in Africa thousands of languages
exist and no one culture emerged to dominate areas of similar size.
Europe, on the other hand, was small enough to have a ‘lingua franca’
through which to communicate, and a landscape that encouraged
interaction.

Even had technologically productive nation states arisen, much of the
continent would still have struggled to connect to the rest of the world
because the bulk of the land mass is framed by the Indian and Atlantic
oceans and the Sahara Desert. The exchange of ideas and technology
barely touched sub-Saharan Africa for thousands of years. Despite this,
several African empires and city states did arise after about the sixth
century <small>CE</small>: for example the Mali Empire
(thirteenth–sixteenth century), and the city state of Great Zimbabwe
(eleventh–fifteenth century), the latter in land between the Zambezi and
Limpopo rivers. However, these and others were isolated to relatively
small regional blocs, and although the myriad cultures which did emerge
across the continent may have been politically sophisticated, the
physical landscape remained a barrier to technological development: by
the time the outside world arrived in force, most had yet to develop
writing, paper, gunpowder or the wheel.

<span id="chapter05.html#page_102"></span>Traders from the Middle East
and the Mediterranean had been doing business in the Sahara, after the
introduction of camels, from about 2,000 years ago, notably trading the
vast resources of salt there; but it wasn’t until the Arab conquests of
the seventh century <small>CE</small> that the scene was set for a push
southward. By the ninth century they had crossed the Sahara, and by the
eleventh were firmly established as far south as modern-day Nigeria. The
Arabs were also coming down the east coast and establishing themselves
in places such as Zanzibar and Dar es Salaam in what is now Tanzania.

When the Europeans finally made it down the west coast in the fifteenth
century they found few natural harbours for their ships. Unlike Europe
or North America, where the jagged coastlines give rise to deep natural
harbours, much of the African coastline is smooth. And once they did
make land they struggled to penetrate any further inland than about 100
miles due to the difficulty of navigating the rivers, as well as the
challenges of the climate and disease.

Both the Arabs and then the Europeans brought with them new technology
which they mostly kept to themselves, and took away whatever they found
of value, which was mainly natural resources and people.

Slavery existed long before the outside world returned to where it had
originated. Traders in the Sahel region used thousands of slaves to
transport vast quantities of the region’s then most valuable commodity,
salt, but the Arabs began the practice of subcontracting African
slave-taking to willing tribal leaders who would deliver them to the
coast. By the time of the peak of the Ottoman Empire in the fifteenth
and sixteenth centuries hundreds of thousands of Africans (mostly from
the Sudan region) had been taken to Istanbul, Cairo, Damascus and across
the Arabian world. The Europeans followed suit, outdoing the Arabs and
Turks in their appetite for, and mistreatment of, the people brought to
the slave ships anchored off the west coast.

Back in the great capital cities of London, Paris, Brussels and Lisbon,
<span id="chapter05.html#page_103"></span>the Europeans then took maps
of the contours of Africa’s geography and drew lines on them – or, to
take a more aggressive approach, lies. In between these lines they wrote
words such as Middle Congo or Upper Volta and called them countries.
These lines were more about how far which power’s explorers, military
forces and businessmen had advanced on the map than what the people
living between the lines felt themselves to be, or how they wanted to
organise themselves. Many Africans are now partially the prisoners of
the political geography the Europeans made, and of the natural barriers
to progression with which nature endowed them. From this they are making
a modern home and, in some cases, vibrant, connected economies.

There are now fifty-six countries in Africa. Since the ‘winds of change’
of the independence movement blew through the mid twentieth century,
some of the words between the lines have been altered – for example,
Rhodesia is now Zimbabwe – but the borders are, surprisingly, mostly
intact. However, many encompass the same divisions they did when first
drawn, and those formal divisions are some of the many legacies
colonialism bequeathed the continent.

The ethnic conflicts within Sudan, Somalia, Kenya, Angola, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Nigeria, Mali and elsewhere are
evidence that the European idea of geography did not fit the reality of
Africa’s demographics. There may have always been conflict: the Zulus
and Xhosas had their differences long before they had ever set eyes on a
European. But colonialism forced those differences to be resolved within
an artificial structure – the European concept of a nation state. The
modern civil wars are now partially because the colonialists told
different nations that they were one nation in one state, and then after
the colonialists were chased out a dominant people emerged within the
state who wanted to rule it all, thus ensuring violence.

Take, for example, Libya, an artificial construct only a few decades old
which at the first test fell apart into its previous incarnation as
<span id="chapter05.html#page_104"></span>three distinct geographical
regions. In the west it was, in Greek times, Tripolitania (from the
Greek *tri polis*, three cities, which eventually merged and became
Tripoli). The area to the east, centred on the city of Benghazi but
stretching down to the Chad border, was known in both Greek and Roman
times as Cyrenaica. Below these two, in what is now the far south-west
of the country, is the region of Fezzan.

Tripolitania was always orientated north and north-west, trading with
its southern European neighbours. Cyrenaica always looked east to Egypt
and the Arab lands. Even the sea current off the coast of the Benghazi
region takes boats naturally eastwards. Fezzan was traditionally a land
of nomads who had little in common with the two coastal communities.

This is how the Greeks, Romans and Turks all ruled the area – it is how
the people had thought of themselves for centuries. The mere decades-old
European idea of Libya will struggle to survive and already one of the
many Islamist groups in the east has declared an ‘emirate of Cyrenaica’.
While this may not come to pass, it is an example of how the concept of
the region originated merely in lines drawn on maps by foreigners.

However, one of the biggest failures of European line-drawing lies in
the centre of the continent, the giant black hole known as the
Democratic Republic of the Congo – the DRC. Here is the land in which
Joseph Conrad set his novel *Heart of Darkness*, and it remains a place
shrouded in the darkness of war. It is a prime example of how the
imposition of artificial borders can lead to a weak and divided state,
ravaged by internal conflict, and whose mineral wealth condemns it to
being exploited by outsiders.

The DRC is an illustration of why the catch-all term ‘developing world’
is far too broad-brush a way to describe countries which are not part of
the modern industrialised world. The DRC is not developing, nor does it
show any signs of so doing. The DRC should never have been put <span
id="chapter05.html#page_105"></span>together; it has fallen apart and is
the most under-reported war zone in the world, despite the fact that six
million people have died there during wars which have been fought since
the late 1990s.

The DRC is neither democratic, nor a republic. It is the second-largest
country in Africa with a population of about 75 million, although due to
the situation there it is difficult to find accurate figures. It is
bigger than Germany, France and Spain combined and contains the Congo
Rainforest, second only to the Amazon as the largest in the world.

The people are divided into more than 200 ethnic groups, of which the
biggest are the Bantu. There are several hundred languages, but the
widespread use of French bridges that gap to a degree. The French comes
from the DRC’s years as a Belgian colony (1908–60) and before that when
King Leopold of the Belgians used it as his personal property from which
to steal its natural resources to line his pockets. Belgian colonial
rule made the British and French versions look positively benign and was
ruthlessly brutal from start to finish, with few attempts to build any
sort of infrastructure to help the inhabitants. When the Belgians went
in 1960 they left behind little chance of the country holding together.

The civil wars began immediately and were later intensified by a
blood-soaked walk-on role in the global Cold War. The government in the
capital, Kinshasa, backed the rebel side in Angola’s war, thus bringing
itself to the attention of the USA, which was also supporting the rebel
movement against the Soviet-backed Angolan government. Each side poured
in hundreds of millions of dollars’ worth of arms.

When the Cold War ended both great powers had less interest in what by
then was called Zaire and the country staggered on, kept afloat by its
natural resources. The Rift Valley curves into the DRC in its south and
east and it has exposed huge quantities of cobalt, copper, diamonds,
gold, silver, zinc, coal, manganese and other minerals, especially in
Katanga Province.

In King Leopold’s days the world wanted the region’s rubber for the
<span id="chapter05.html#page_106"></span>expanding motor car industry;
now China buys more than 50 per cent of the DRC’s exports, but still the
population lives in poverty. In 2014 the United Nations Human
Development Index placed the DRC 186th out of 187 countries it measured.
The bottom eighteen countries in that list are all in Africa.

Because it is so resource-rich and so large, everyone wants a bite out
of the DRC, which, as it lacks a substantive central authority, cannot
really bite back.

The region is also bordered by nine countries. They have all played a
role in the DRC’s agony, which is one reason why the Congo wars are also
known as ‘Africa’s world war’. To the south is Angola, to the north the
Republic of the Congo and the Central Africa Republic, to the east
Uganda, Rwanda, Burundi, Tanzania and Zambia. The roots of the wars go
back decades, but the worst of times was triggered by the disaster that
hit Rwanda in 1994 and swept westward in its aftermath.

After the genocide in Rwanda the Tutsi survivors and moderate Hutus
formed a Tutsi-led government. The killing machines of the Hutu militia,
the Interahamwe, fled into eastern DRC but conducted border raids. They
also joined with sections of the DRC army to kill the DRC’s Tutsis, who
live near the border region. In came the Rwandan and Ugandan armies,
backed by Burundi and Eritrea. Allied with opposition militias, they
attacked the Interahamwe and overthrew the DRC government. They also
went on to control much of the country’s natural wealth, with Rwanda in
particular shipping back tons of coltan, which is used in the making of
mobile phones and computer chips. However, what had been the government
forces did not give up and – with the involvement of Angola, Namibia and
Zimbabwe – continued the fight. The country became a vast battleground,
with more than twenty factions involved in the fighting.

The wars have killed, at a low estimate, tens of thousands of people,
and have resulted in the deaths of another six million due to disease
and <span id="chapter05.html#page_107"></span>malnutrition. The UN
estimates that almost 50 per cent of the victims have been children aged
under five.

In recent years the fighting has died down, but the DRC is home to the
world’s most deadly conflict since the Second World War and still
requires the UN’s largest peacekeeping mission to prevent full-scale war
from breaking out again. Now the job is not to put Humpty Dumpty
together again, because the DRC was never whole. It is simply to keep
the pieces apart until a way can be found to join them sensibly and
peacefully. The European colonialist created an egg without a chicken, a
logical absurdity repeated across the continent and one that continues
to haunt it.

Africa has been equally cursed and blessed by its resources – blessed in
so far as it has natural riches in abundance, but cursed because
outsiders have long plundered them. In more recent times the nation
states have been able to claim a share of these riches, and foreign
countries now invest rather than steal, but still the people are rarely
the beneficiaries.

In addition to its natural mineral wealth, Africa is also blessed with
many great rivers – although most of its rivers do not encourage trade,
they are good for hydroelectricity. However, this too is a source of
potential conflict.

The Nile, the longest river in the world (4,100 miles), affects ten
countries considered to be in the proximity of its basin – Burundi, the
DRC, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Kenya, Rwanda, Sudan, Tanzania, Uganda and
Egypt. As long ago as the fifth century <small>BCE</small> the historian
Herodotus said: ‘Egypt is the Nile, and the Nile is Egypt.’ It is still
true, and so a threat to the supply to Egypt’s 700-mile-long, fully
navigable section of the Nile is for Cairo a concern – one over which it
would be prepared to go to war. Without the Nile, there would be no one
there. It may be a huge country, but the vast majority of its 84 million
population lives within a few miles of the Nile. Measured by the area in
which people dwell, Egypt is one of the most densely populated countries
in the world.

<span id="chapter05.html#page_108"></span>Egypt was, arguably, a nation
state when most Europeans were living in mud huts, but it was only ever
a regional power. It is protected by deserts on three sides and might
have become a great power in the Mediterranean region but for one
problem. There are hardly any trees in Egypt, and for most of history,
if you didn’t have trees you couldn’t build a great navy with which to
project your power. There has always been an Egyptian navy – it used to
import cedar from Lebanon to build ships at huge expense – but it has
never been a Blue Water navy.

Modern Egypt now has the most powerful armed forces of all the Arab
states, thanks to American military aid; but it remains contained by
deserts, the sea and its peace treaty with Israel. It will remain in the
news as it struggles to cope with feeding 84 million people a day while
battling an Islamist insurgency, especially in the Sinai, and guarding
the Suez Canal, through which passes 8 per cent of the world’s entire
trade every day. Some 2.5 per cent of the world’s oil passes this way
daily; closing the canal would add about fifteen days’ transit time to
Europe and ten to the USA, with concurrent costs.

Despite having fought five wars with Israel, the country Egypt is most
likely to come into conflict with next is Ethiopia, and the issue is the
Nile. Two of the continent’s oldest countries, with the largest armies,
may come to blows over the region’s major source of water.

The Blue Nile, which begins in Ethiopia, and the White Nile meet in the
Sudanese capital, Khartoum, before flowing through the Nubian Desert and
into Egypt. By this point the majority of the water is from the Blue
Nile.

Ethiopia is sometimes called ‘Africa’s water tower’ due to its high
elevation and has more than twenty dams fed by the rainfall in its
highlands. In 2011 Addis Ababa announced a joint project with China to
build a massive hydroelectric project on the Blue Nile near the Sudanese
border called the Grand Renaissance Dam, scheduled to be finished by
2020. The dam will be used to create electricity, and the flow to Egypt
should <span id="chapter05.html#page_109"></span>continue; but in theory
the dam could also hold a year’s worth of water, and completion of the
project would give Ethiopia the potential to hold the water for its own
use, thus drastically reducing the flow into Egypt.

As things stand Egypt has a more powerful military, but that is slowly
changing, and Ethiopia, a country of 96 million people, is a growing
power. Cairo knows this, and also that once the dam is built, destroying
it would create a flooding catastrophe in both Ethiopia and Sudan.
However, at the moment it does not have a *casus belli* to strike before
completion, and despite the fact that a Cabinet minister was recently
caught on microphone recommending bombing, the next few years are more
likely to see intense negotiations, with Egypt wanting cast-iron
guarantees that the flow will be never be stopped. Water wars are
considered to be among the coming conflicts this century and this is one
to watch.

Another hotly contested liquid is oil.

Nigeria is sub-Saharan Africa’s largest producer of oil, and all of this
high-quality oil is in the south. Nigerians in the north complain that
the profits from that oil are not shared equitably across the country’s
regions. This in turn exacerbates the ethnic and religious tensions
between the peoples from the Nigerian delta and those in the north-east.

By size, population and natural resources, Nigeria is West Africa’s most
powerful country. It is the continent’s most populous nation, with 177
million people, which with its size and natural resources makes it the
leading regional power. It is formed from the territories of several
ancient kingdoms which the British brought together as an administrative
area. In 1898 they drew up a ‘British Protectorate on the River Niger’
which in turn became Nigeria.

It may now be an independent regional powerhouse, but its people and
resources have been mismanaged for decades. In colonial times the
British preferred to stay in the south-western area along the coast.
Their ‘civilising’ mission rarely extended to the highlands of the
centre, nor up to the Muslim populations in the north, and this half of
the country <span id="chapter05.html#page_110"></span>remains less
developed than the south. Much of the money made from oil is spent
paying off the movers and shakers in Nigeria’s complex tribal system.
The onshore oil industry in the delta is also being threatened by the
Movement for the Emancipation of the Niger Delta, a fancy name for a
group which does operate in a region devastated by the oil industry, but
which uses it as a cover for terrorism and extortion. The kidnapping of
foreign oil workers is making it a less and less attractive place to do
business. The offshore oilfields are mostly free of this activity and
that is where the investment is heading.

The Islamist group Boko Haram, which wants to establish a caliphate in
the Muslim areas, has used the sense of injustice engendered by
underdevelopment to gain ground in the north. Boko Haram fighters are
usually ethnic Kanuris from the north-east. They rarely operate outside
of their home territory, not even venturing west to the Hausa region,
and certainly not way down south to the coastal areas. This means that
when the Nigerian military come looking for them Boko Haram are
operating on home ground. Much of the local population will not
co-operate with the military, either for fear of reprisal or due to a
shared resentment of the south.

The territory taken by Boko Haram does not yet endanger the existence of
the state of Nigeria. The group does not even pose a threat to the
capital Abuja, despite it being situated halfway up the country; but
they do pose a daily threat to people in the north and they damage
Nigeria’s reputation abroad as a place to do business.

Most of the villages they have captured are on the Mandara mountain
range, which backs onto Cameroon. This means the national army is
operating a long way from its bases, and cannot surround a Boko Haram
force. Cameroon’s government does not welcome Boko Haram, but the
countryside gives the fighters space to retreat to if required. The
situation will not burn itself out for several years, during which time
Boko Haram will try to form alliances with the jihadists up north in the
Sahel region.

<span id="chapter05.html#page_111"></span>The Americans and French have
tracked the problem for several years and now operate surveillance
drones in response to the growing threat of violence projecting out of
the Sahel/Sahara region and connecting with northern Nigeria. The
Americans use several bases, including the one in Djibouti which is part
of the US Africa Command, set up in 2007, and the French have access to
concrete in various countries in what they call ‘Francophone Africa’.

The dangers of the threat spreading across several countries has been a
wake-up call. Nigeria, Cameroon and Chad are all now involved militarily
and co-ordinating with the Americans and French.

Further south, down the Atlantic coast, is sub-Saharan Africa’s
second-largest oil producer – Angola. The former Portuguese colony is
one of the African nation states with natural geographical borders. It
is framed by the Atlantic Ocean to the west, by jungle to the north and
desert to the south, while the eastern regions are sparsely populated
rugged land which acts as a buffer zone with the DRC and Zambia.

The majority of the 22 million-strong population live in the western
half, which is well watered and can sustain agriculture; and off the
coast in the west lie most of Angola’s oilfields. The rigs out in the
Atlantic are mostly owned by American companies, but over half of the
output ends up in China. This makes Angola (dependent on the ebb and
flow of sales) second only to Saudi Arabia as the biggest supplier of
crude oil to the Middle Kingdom.

Angola is another country familiar with conflict. Its war for
independence ended in 1975 when the Portuguese gave up, but it instantly
morphed into a civil war between tribes disguised as a civil war over
ideology. Russia and Cuba supported the ‘socialists’, the USA and
apartheid South Africa backed the ‘rebels’. Most of the socialists of
the MPLA (Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola) were from the
Mbundu tribe, while the opposition rebel fighters were mostly from two
other main tribes, the Bakongo and the Ovimbundu. Their <span
id="chapter05.html#page_112"></span>political disguise was as the FNLA
(National Liberation Front of Angola) and UNITA (National Union for the
Total Independence of Angola). Many of the civil wars of the 1960s and
1970s followed this template: if Russia backed a particular side, that
side would suddenly remember that it had socialist principles while its
opponents would become anti-Communist.

The Mbundu had the geographical but not the numerical advantage. They
held the capital, Luanda, had access to the oilfields and the main
river, the Kwanza, and were backed by countries which could supply them
with Russian arms and Cuban soldiers. They prevailed in 2002 and their
top echelons immediately undermined their own somewhat questionable
socialist credentials by joining the long list of colonial and African
leaders who enriched themselves at the expense of the people.

This sorry history of domestic and foreign exploitation continues in the
twenty-first century.

As we’ve seen, the Chinese are everywhere, they mean business and they
are now every bit as involved across the continent as the Europeans and
Americans. About a third of China’s oil imports come from Africa, which
– along with the precious metals to be found in many African countries –
means they have arrived, and will stay. European and American oil
companies and big multinationals are still far more heavily involved in
Africa, but China is quickly catching up. For example, in Liberia it is
seeking iron ore, in the DRC and Zambia it’s mining copper and, also in
the DRC, cobalt. It has already helped to develop the Kenyan port of
Mombasa and is now embarking on more huge projects just as Kenya’s oil
assets are beginning to become commercially viable.

China’s state-owned China Road and Bridge Corporation is building a $14
billion rail project to connect Mombasa to the capital city of Nairobi.
Analysts say the time taken for goods to travel between the two cities
will be reduced from thirty-six hours to eight hours, with a
corresponding cut of 60 per cent in transport costs. There are even
plans <span id="chapter05.html#page_113"></span>to link Nairobi up to
South Sudan, and across to Uganda and Rwanda. Kenya intends, with
Chinese help, to be the economic powerhouse of the eastern seaboard.

Over the southern border Tanzania is trying a rival bid to become East
Africa’s leader and has concluded billions of dollars’ worth of deals
with the Chinese on infrastructure projects. It has also signed a joint
agreement with China and an Omani construction company to overhaul and
extend the port of Bagamoyo, as the main port in Dar es Salaam is
severely congested. It is planned that Bagamoyo will be able to handle
20 million cargo containers a year, which will make it the biggest port
in Africa. Tanzania also has good transport links in the ‘Southern
Agricultural Growth Corridor of Tanzania’ and is connecting down into
the fifteen-nation Southern African Development Community. This in turn
links into the North–South Corridor, which connects the port of Durban
to the copper regions of DRC and Zambia with spurs linking the port of
Dar es Salaam to Durban and Malawi.

Despite this, Tanzania looks as if it will be the second-tier power
along the east coast. Kenya’s economy is the powerhouse in the
five-nation East African Community, accounting for about 40 per cent of
the region’s GDP. It may have less arable land than Tanzania, but it
uses what it has much more efficiently. Its industrial system is also
more efficient, as is its system of getting goods to market – both
domestic and international. If it can maintain political stability it
looks destined to remain the dominant regional power in the near to
medium term.

China’s presence also stretches into Niger, with the Chinese National
Petroleum Corporation investing in the small oilfield in the Ténéré
fields in the centre of the country. And Chinese investment in Angola
over the past decade exceeds $8 billion and is growing every year. The
Chinese Railway Engineering Corporation (CREC) has already spent almost
$2 billion modernising the Benguela railway line which links the DRC to
the Angolan port of Lobito on the Atlantic coast 800 miles away. <span
id="chapter05.html#page_114"></span>This way come the cobalt, copper and
manganese with which Katanga Province in the DRC is cursed and blessed.

In Luanda CREC is constructing a new international airport, and around
the capital huge apartment blocks built to the Chinese model have sprung
up to house some of the estimated 150,000–200,000 Chinese workers now in
the country. Thousands of these workers are also trained in military
skills and could provide a ready-made militia if China so required.

What Beijing wants in Angola is what it wants everywhere: the materials
with which to make its products, and political stability to ensure the
flow of those materials and products. So if President José Eduardo dos
Santos, who has been in charge for thirty-six years, decided to pay
Mariah Carey $1 million to sing at his birthday party in 2013, that’s
his affair. And if the Mbundu, to which dos Santos belongs, continue to
dominate, that is theirs.

Chinese involvement is an attractive proposition for many African
governments. Beijing and the big Chinese companies don’t ask difficult
questions about human rights, they don’t demand economic reform or even
suggest that certain African leaders stop stealing their countries’
wealth as the IMF or World Bank might. For example, China is Sudan’s
biggest trading partner, which goes some way to explaining why China
consistently protects Sudan at the UN Security Council and continued to
back its President Omar al-Bashir even when there was an arrest warrant
out for him issued by the International Criminal Court. Western
criticism of this gets short shrift in Beijing, however; it is regarded
as simply another power play aimed at stopping China doing business, and
hypocrisy given the West’s history in Africa.

All the Chinese want is the oil, the minerals, the precious metals and
the markets. This is an equitable government-to-government relationship,
but we will see increasing tension between local populations and the
Chinese workforces often brought in to assist the <span
id="chapter05.html#page_115"></span>big projects. This in turn may draw
Beijing more into the local politics, and require it to have some sort
of minor military presence in various countries.

South Africa is China’s largest trading partner in Africa. The two
countries have a long political and economic history and are well placed
to work together. Hundreds of Chinese companies, both state owned and
private, now operate in Durban, Johannesburg, Pretoria, Cape Town and
Port Elizabeth.

South Africa’s economy is ranked second-biggest on the continent behind
Nigeria. It is certainly the powerhouse in the south in terms of its
economy (three times the size of Angola’s), military and population (53
million). South Africa is more developed than many African nations,
thanks to its location at the very southern tip of the continent with
access to two oceans, its natural wealth of gold, silver and coal and a
climate and land that allow for large-scale food production.

Because it is located so far south, and the coastal plain quickly rises
into high land, South Africa is one of the very few African countries
that do not suffer from the curse of malaria, as mosquitoes find it
difficult to breed there. This allowed the European colonialists to push
into its interior much further and faster than in the malaria-riddled
tropics, settle, and begin small-scale industrial activity which grew
into what is now southern Africa’s biggest economy.

For most of Southern Africa, doing business with the outside world means
doing business with Pretoria, Bloemfontein and Cape Town.

South Africa has used its natural wealth and location to tie its
neighbours into its transport system, meaning there is a two-way rail
and road conveyer belt stretching from the ports in East London, Cape
Town, Port Elizabeth and Durban stretching north through Zimbabwe,
Botswana, Zambia, Malawi and Tanzania, reaching even into Katanga
Province of the DRC and eastward into Mozambique. The new Chinese-built
railway from Katanga to the Angolan coast has been laid to challenge
this <span id="chapter05.html#page_116"></span>dominance and might take
some traffic from the DRC, but South Africa looks destined to maintain
its advantages.

During the apartheid years the ANC (African National Congress) backed
Angola’s MPLA in its fight against Portuguese colonisation. However, the
passion of a shared struggle is turning into a cooler relationship now
that each party controls its respective country and competes at a
regional level. Angola has a long way to go to catch up with South
Africa. This will not be a military confrontation: South Africa’s
dominance is near-total. It has large, well-equipped armed forces
comprising about 100,000 personnel, dozens of fighter jets and attack
helicopters, as well as several modern submarines and frigates.

In the days of the British Empire, controlling South Africa meant
controlling the Cape of Good Hope and thus the sea lanes between the
Atlantic and Indian oceans. Modern navies can venture much further out
from the southern African coastline if they wish to pass by, but the
Cape is still a commanding piece of real estate on the world map and
South Africa is a commanding presence in the whole of the bottom third
of the continent.

There is a new scramble for Africa in this century, but this time it is
two-pronged. There are the well-publicised outside interests, and
meddling, in the competition for resources, but there is also the
‘scramble within’, and South Africa intends to scramble fastest and
furthest.

It dominates the fifteen-nation Southern African Development Community
(SADC) and has managed to gain a permanent place at the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, of which it is not even a member.
The SADC is rivalled by the East African Community (EAC) comprising
Burundi, Kenya, Rwanda, Uganda and Tanzania. The latter is also a member
of the SADC and the other EAC members take a dim view of its flirtation
with South Africa. For its part South Africa appears to view Tanzania as
its vehicle for gaining greater influence in the Great Lakes region and
beyond.

<span id="chapter05.html#page_117"></span>The South African National
Defence Force has a brigade in the DRC officially under the command of
the UN, but it was sent there by its political masters to ensure that
South Africa is not left out from the spoils of war in that mineral-rich
country. This has brought it into competition with Uganda, Burundi and
Rwanda, which have their own ideas about who should be in charge in the
DRC.

The Africa of the past was given no choice – its geography shaped it –
and then the Europeans engineered most of today’s borders. Now, with its
booming populations and developing mega-cities, it has no choice but to
embrace the modern globalised world to which it is so connected. In
this, despite all the problems we have seen, it is making huge strides.

The same rivers that hampered trade are now harnessed for hydroelectric
power. From the earth that struggled to sustain large-scale food
production come minerals and oil, making some countries rich even if
little of the wealth reaches the people. Nevertheless, in most, but not
all, countries poverty has fallen as healthcare and education levels
have risen. Many countries are English-speaking, which in an
English-language-dominated global economy is an advantage, and the
continent has seen economic growth over most of the past decade.

On the downside, economic growth in many countries is dependent on
global prices for minerals and energy. Countries whose national budgets
are predicated on receiving $100 dollars per barrel of oil, for example,
have little to fall back on when prices drop to $80 or $60.
Manufacturing output levels are close to where they were in the 1970s.
Corruption remains rampant across the continent, and as well as the few
‘hot’ conflicts (Somalia, Nigeria, Sudan, for example) there are several
more that are merely frozen.

Nevertheless, every year more roads and railways are being built
connecting this incredibly diverse space. The vast distances of the
oceans and deserts separating Africa from everywhere have been overcome
by <span id="chapter05.html#page_118"></span>air travel, and industrial
muscle has created harbours in places nature had not intended them to
be.

In every decade since the 1960s optimists have written about how Africa
is on the brink of prevailing over the hand history and nature have
dealt it. Perhaps this time it is true. It needs to be. Sub-Saharan
Africa currently holds 1.1 billion people, by some estimates – by 2050
that may have more than doubled to 2.4 billion.

<span id="chapter06.html"></span>

<span id="chapter06.html#page_119"></span>CHAPTER 6 []
---------------------------------------------------

**THE MIDDLE EAST** []
-------------------

 

*‘We’ve broken Sykes-Picot!’*  
Islamic State fighter, 2014

<span id="chapter06.html#page_120"></span><span
id="chapter06.html#page_121"></span>![illustration](media/prisoners-of-geography-assets/images/f0120-01.png)

 

<span id="chapter06.html#page_122"></span><span
class="big">T</span><small>HE MIDDLE OF WHAT? EAST OF WHERE? THE
REGION’S VERY</small> name is based on a European view of the world, and
it is a European view of the region that shaped it. The Europeans used
ink to draw lines on maps: they were lines that did not exist in reality
and created some of the most artificial borders the world has seen. An
attempt is now being made to redraw them in blood.

One of the most important pieces of video to emerge from the Middle East
in 2014 was overshadowed that year by footage of explosions and
beheadings. It is a piece of slick propaganda by Islamic State and shows
a bulldozer wiping, or rather pushing, the Iraqi–Syrian border out of
existence. The border is simply a high berm of sand. Move the sand and
the border no longer *physically* exists. This ‘line’ still exists in
theory. The next few years will determine whether the words of the
Islamic State fighter quoted above are prophetic, or mere bravado: ‘We
are destroying the borders and breaking the barriers. Thanks be to
Allah.’

After the First World War, there were fewer borders in the wider Middle
East than currently exist, and those that did exist were usually
determined by geography alone. The spaces within them were loosely
subdivided and governed according to geography, ethnicity and religion,
but there was no attempt to create nation states.

The Greater Middle East extends across 1,000 miles, west to east, from
the Mediterranean Sea to the mountains of Iran. From north to south, if
we start at the Black Sea and end on the shores of the Arabian Sea off
Oman, it is 2,000 miles long. The region includes vast deserts, oases,
snow-covered mountains, long rivers, great cities and coastal <span
id="chapter06.html#page_123"></span>plains. And it has a great deal of
natural wealth in the form that every industrialised and industrialising
country around the world needs – oil and gas.

It also contains the fertile region known as Mesopotamia, the ‘land
between the rivers’ (the Euphrates and Tigris). However, the most
dominant feature is the vast Arabian Desert and scrubland in its centre
which touches parts of Israel, Jordan, Syria, Iraq, Kuwait, Oman, Yemen
and most of Saudi Arabia including the Rub’ al Khali or ‘Empty Quarter’.
This is the largest continuous sand desert in the world, incorporating
an area the size of France. It is due to this feature not only that the
majority of the inhabitants of the region live on its periphery, but
also that until European colonisation most of the people within it did
not think in terms of nation states and legally fixed borders.

The notion that a man from a certain area could not travel across a
region to see a relative from the same tribe unless he had a document,
granted to him by a third man he didn’t know in a faraway town, made
little sense. The idea that the document was issued because a foreigner
had said the area was now two regions and had made up names for them
made no sense at all and was contrary to the way in which life had been
lived for centuries.

The Ottoman Empire (1299–1922) was ruled from Istanbul. At its height it
stretched from the gates of Vienna, across Anatolia and down through
Arabia to the Indian Ocean. From west to east it took in what are now
Algeria, Libya, Egypt, Israel/Palestine, Syria, Jordan, Iraq and parts
of Iran. It had never bothered to make up names for most of these
regions; in 1867 it simply divided them into administrative areas known
as ‘Vilayets’, which were usually based on where certain tribes lived,
be they the Kurds in present-day Northern Iraq, or the tribal
federations in what is now part of Syria and part of Iraq.

When the Ottoman Empire began to collapse, the British and French had a
different idea. In 1916 the British diplomat Colonel Sir Mark Sykes
<span id="chapter06.html#page_124"></span>took a chinagraph pencil and
drew a crude line across a map of the Middle East. It ran from Haifa on
the Mediterranean in what is now Israel to Kirkuk (now in Iraq) in the
north-east. It became the basis of his secret agreement with his French
counterpart François Georges-Picot to divide the region into two spheres
of influence should the Triple Entente defeat the Ottoman Empire in the
First World War. North of the line was to be under French control, south
of it under British hegemony.

The term ‘Sykes-Picot’ has become shorthand for the various decisions
made in the first third of the twentieth century which betrayed promises
given to tribal leaders and which partially explain the unrest and
extremism of today. This explanation can be overstated, though: there
was violence and extremism before the Europeans arrived. Nevertheless,
as we saw in Africa, arbitrarily creating ‘nation states’ out of people
unused to living together in one region is not a recipe for justice,
equality and stability.

Prior to Sykes-Picot (in its wider sense), there was no state of Syria,
no Lebanon, nor were there Jordan, Iraq, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Israel or
Palestine. Modern maps show the borders and the names of nation states,
but they are young and they are fragile.

Islam is the dominant religion of the Middle East, but contains within
it many different versions. The most important division within Islam is
almost as old as the religion itself: the split between Sunni and Shia
Muslims dates back to 632 <small>CE</small> when the prophet Muhammad
died, leading to a dispute over his succession.

The Sunni Muslims form the majority among Arabs, and indeed among the
world’s Muslim population, comprising perhaps 85 per cent of the total,
although within some of the Arab countries the percentages are less
distinct. The name comes from ‘Al Sunna’ or ‘people of tradition’. Upon
the death of the Prophet, those who would become Sunni argued that his
successor should be chosen using Arab tribal traditions. They regard
themselves as Orthodox Muslims.

<span id="chapter06.html#page_125"></span>The word Shia derives from
‘Shiat Ali’, literally ‘the party of Ali’, and refers to the son-in-law
of the Prophet Muhammad. Ali and his sons Hassan and Hussein were all
assassinated and thus denied what the Shia feel was their birthright –
to lead the Islamic community.

From this sprang several doctrinal disputes and cultural practices
dividing the two main branches of Islam that have led to disputes and
warfare, although there have also been long periods of peaceful
coexistence.

There are also divisions within the division. For example, there are
various branches of Sunni Islam that follow particular great scholars
from the past, including the strict Hanbali tradition, named after the
ninth-century Iraqi scholar Ahmad ibn Hanbal, favoured by many Sunnis
from Qatar and Saudi Arabia; this in turn has influenced the
ultra-puritanical Salafi thought, which predominates among jihadists.

Shia Islam has three main divisions, the best known of which is probably
the Twelvers, who adhere to the teaching of the Twelve Imams, but even
that contains divisions. The Ismaili school disputes the lineage of the
seventh Imam, while the Zaidi school disputes that of the fifth Imam.
There are also several offshoots from mainstream Shia Islam, with the
Alawites (Alawis) and Druze being considered so far away from
traditional Islamic thought that many other Muslims, especially among
the Sunni, do not even recognise them as being part of the religion.

The legacy of European colonialism left the Arabs grouped into nation
states and ruled by leaders who tended to favour whichever branch of
Islam (and tribe) they themselves came from. These dictators then used
the machinery of state to ensure their writ ruled over the entire area
within the artificial lines drawn by the Europeans, regardless of
whether this was historically appropriate and fair to the different
tribes and religions that had been thrown together.

Iraq is a prime example of the ensuing conflicts and chaos. The more
religious among the Shia never accepted that a Sunni-led government
should have control over their holy cities such as Najaf and Karbala,
<span id="chapter06.html#page_126"></span>where their martyrs Ali and
Hussein are said to be buried. These communal feelings go back
centuries; a few decades of being called ‘Iraqis’ was never going to
dilute such emotions.

As rulers of the Ottoman Empire the Turks saw a rugged, mountainous area
dominated by Kurds, then, as the mountains fell away into the flatlands
leading towards Baghdad, and west to what is now Syria, they saw a place
where the majority of people were Sunni Arabs. Finally, after the two
great rivers the Tigris and the Euphrates merged and ran down to the
Shatt al-Arab waterway, the marshlands and the city of Basra, they saw
more Arabs, most of whom were Shia. They ruled this space accordingly,
dividing it into three administrative regions: Mosul, Baghdad and Basra.

In antiquity, the regions very roughly corresponding to the above were
known as Assyria, Babylonia and Sumer. When the Persians controlled the
space they divided it in a similar way, as did Alexander the Great, and
later the Umayyad Empire. The British looked at the same area and
divided the three into one, a logical impossibility Christians can
resolve through the Holy Trinity, but which in Iraq has resulted in an
unholy mess.

Many analysts say that only a strong man could unite these three areas
into one country, and Iraq had one strong man after another. But in
reality the people were never unified, they were only frozen with fear.
In the one place which the dictators could not see, people’s minds, few
bought into the propaganda of the state, wallpapering as it did over the
systematic persecution of the Kurds, the domination by Saddam’s Sunni
Muslim clan from his home town of Tikrit, nor the mass slaughter of the
Shia after their failed uprising in 1991.

The Kurds were the first to leave. The smallest minorities in a
dictatorship will sometimes pretend to believe the propaganda that their
rights are protected because they lack the strength to do anything about
the reality. For example, Iraq’s Christian minority, and its handful of
Jews, <span id="chapter06.html#page_127"></span>felt they might be safer
keeping quiet in a secular dictatorship, such as Saddam’s, than risk
change and what they feared might, and indeed has, followed. However,
the Kurds were geographically defined and, crucially, numerous enough to
be able to react when the reality of dictatorship became too much.

Iraq’s five million Kurds are concentrated in the north and northeastern
provinces of Irbil, Sulaymaniyah and Dahuk and their surrounding areas.
It is a giant crescent of mostly hills and mountains, which meant the
Kurds retained their distinct identity despite repeated cultural and
military attacks against them, such as the al-Anfal campaign of 1988,
which included aerial gas attacks against villages. During the
eight-stage campaign, Saddam’s forces took no prisoners and killed all
males aged between fifteen and fifty that they came across. Up to
100,000 Kurds were murdered and 90 per cent of their villages wiped off
the map.

When in 1990 Saddam Hussein over-reached into Kuwait, the Kurds went on
to seize their chance to make history and turn Kurdistan into the
reality they had been promised after the First World War in the Treaty
of Sèvres (1920), but never granted. At the tail end of the Gulf War
conflict the Kurds rose up, the Allied forces declared a ‘safe zone’
into which Iraqi forces were not allowed, and a de facto Kurdistan began
to take shape. The 2003 invasion of Iraq by the USA cemented what
appears to be a fact – Baghdad will not again rule the Kurds.

Kurdistan is not a sovereign recognised state but it has many of the
trappings of one, and current events in the Middle East only add to the
probability that there will be a Kurdistan in name and in international
law. The questions are: what shape will it be? And how will Syria,
Turkey and Iran react if their Kurdish regions attempt to be part of it
and try to create a contiguous Kurdistan with access to the
Mediterranean?

There will be another problem: unity among the Kurds. Iraqi Kurdistan
has long been divided between two rival families. Syria’s Kurds are
trying to create a statelet they call Rojava. They see it as part of a
future greater Kurdistan, but in the event of its creation questions
would arise as to who would have how much power, and where. If Kurdistan
does become an internationally recognised state then the shape of Iraq
will change. That assumes there will be an Iraq. There may not be.

<span
id="chapter06.html#page_128"></span>![illustration](media/prisoners-of-geography-assets/images/f0128-01.png)

Although not a recognised state, there is an identifiable ‘Kurdistan’
region. Crossing borders as it does, this is an area of potential
trouble should the Kurdish regions attempt to establish an independent
country.

The Hashemite Kingdom, as Jordan is also known, is another place that
was carved out of the desert by the British, who in 1918 had one large
piece of territory to administer and several problems to solve.

Various Arabian tribes had helped the British against the Ottomans
during the First World War, but there were two in particular which
London promised to reward at the war’s end. Unfortunately both were
<span id="chapter06.html#page_129"></span>promised the same thing –
control of the Arabian Peninsula. Given that the Saud and Hashemite
tribes frequently fought each other, this was a little awkward. So
London dusted down the maps, drew some lines and said the head of the
Saud family could rule over one region, and the head of the Hashemites
could rule the other, although each would ‘need’ a British diplomat to
keep an eye on things. The Saudi leader eventually landed on a name for
his territory, calling it after himself, hence we know the area as Saudi
Arabia – the rough equivalent would be calling the UK ‘Windsorland’.

The British, sticklers for administration, named the other area
‘Transjordan’, which was shorthand for ‘the other side of the Jordan
River’. A dusty little town called Amman became the capital of
Transjordan, and when the British went home in 1948 the country’s name
changed to Jordan. But the Hashemites were not from the Amman area: they
were originally part of the powerful Qureshi tribe from the Mecca
region, and the original inhabitants were mostly Bedouin. The majority
of the population is now Palestinian: when the Israelis occupied the
West Bank in 1967 many Palestinians fled to Jordan, which was the only
Arab state to grant them citizenship. We now have a situation where the
majority of Jordan’s 6.7 million citizens are Palestinian, many of whom
do not regard themselves as loyal subjects of the current Hashemite
ruler, King Abdullah. Added to this problem are the one million Iraqi
and Syrian refugees the country has also taken in who are putting a huge
strain on its extremely limited resources.

Such changes to a country’s demographics can cause serious problems, and
nowhere more so than in Lebanon.

Until the twentieth century, the Arabs in the region saw the area
between the Lebanese mountains and the sea as simply a province of the
region of Syria. The French, into whose grasp it fell after the First
World War, saw things differently.

The French had long allied themselves with the region’s Arab <span
id="chapter06.html#page_130"></span>Christians and by way of thanks made
up a country for them in a place in which they appeared in the 1920s to
be the dominant population. As there was no other obvious name for this
country the French named it after the nearby mountains, and thus Lebanon
was born. This geographical fancy held until the late 1950s. By then the
birth rate among Lebanon’s Shia and Sunni Muslims was growing faster
than that of the Christians, while the Muslim population had been
swollen by Palestinians fleeing the 1948 Arab–Israeli War in
neighbouring Israel/Palestine. There has only been one official census
in Lebanon (in 1932), because demographics is such a sensitive issue and
the political system is partially based on population sizes.

There have long been bouts of fighting between the various confessional
groups in the area, and what some historians call the first Lebanese
civil war broke out in 1958 between the Maronite Christians and the
Muslims, who by this time probably slightly outnumbered the Christians.
They are now in a clear majority but there are still no official
figures, and academic studies citing numbers are fiercely contested.

Some parts of the capital, Beirut, are exclusively Shia Muslim, as is
most of the south of the country. This is where the Shia Hezbollah group
(backed by Shia-dominated Iran) is dominant. Another Shia stronghold is
the Beqaa Valley, which Hezbollah has used as a staging post for its
forages into Syria to support government forces there. Other towns are
overwhelmingly Sunni Muslim. For example Tripoli, in the north, is
thought to be 80 per cent Sunni, but it also has a sizeable Alawite
minority, and given the Sunni–Alawite tensions next door in Syria this
has led to sporadic bouts of fighting.

Lebanon appears to be a unified state only from the perspective of
seeing it on a map. It takes just a few minutes after arriving at Beirut
Airport to discover it is far from that. The drive from the airport to
the centre takes you past the exclusively Shia southern suburbs, which
are partially policed by the Hezbollah militia, probably the most
efficient <span id="chapter06.html#page_131"></span>fighting force in
the country. The Lebanese army exists on paper, but in the event of
another civil war such as that of 1975–90, it would fall apart, as
soldiers in most units would simply go back to their home towns and join
the local militias.

That is, in part, what happened to the Syrian armed forces once the
civil war there really took hold towards the end of 2011.

Syria is another multi-faith, multi-confessional, multi-tribal state
which fell apart at the first time of asking. Typical of the region, the
country is majority Sunni Muslim – about 70 per cent – but has
substantial minorities of other faiths. Until 2011 many communities
lived side by side in the towns, cities and countryside, but there were
still distinct areas in which a particular group dominated. As in Iraq,
locals would always tell you, ‘We are one people, there are no divisions
between us.’ However, as in Iraq, your name, place of birth or place of
habitation usually meant your background could be easily identified,
and, as in Iraq, it didn’t take much to pull the one people apart into
many.

When the French ruled the region they followed the British example of
divide and rule. At that time the Alawites were known as Nusayris. Many
Sunnis do not count them as Muslims, and such was the hostility towards
them they rebranded themselves as Alawites (as in ‘followers of Ali’) to
reinforce their Islamic credentials. They were a backward hill people,
at the bottom of the social strata in Syrian society. The French took
them and put them into the police force and military, from where over
the years they established themselves as a major power in the land.

Fundamentally, everyone was aware of the tension of having leaders from
a small minority of the population ruling the majority. The Assad clan,
from which President Bashar Assad comes, is Alawite, a group that
comprises approximately 12 per cent of the population. The family has
ruled the country since Bashar’s father, Hafez, took power in a coup
d’état in 1970. In 1982 Hafez crushed a Muslim Brotherhood Sunni <span
id="chapter06.html#page_132"></span>uprising in Hama, killing perhaps
30,000 people over several days. The Brotherhood never forgave or
forgot, and when the nationwide uprising began in 2011 there were scores
to be settled. In some respects the ensuing civil war was simply Hama,
Part Two.

The final shape and make-up of Syria is now in question, but there is
one scenario in which, if Damascus falls (although that is far from
probable), the Alawites retreat to their ancient coastal and hill
strongholds and form a mini-statelet such as existed in the 1920s and
1930s. It is theoretically possible, but hundreds of thousands of Sunni
Muslims would remain in the region and were a new Sunni-dominated
government to be formed in Damascus, one of its priorities would be to
secure a route to the Syrian coast and defeat the last pockets of
resistance.

In the near future Syria looks as if it is destined to be ruled as a
number of fiefdoms with various warlords holding sway. At the time of
writing, President Assad is simply the most powerful warlord of many.
Lebanon’s most recent civil war lasted for fifteen years and at times it
remains perilously close to another one. Syria may suffer a similar
fate.

Syria has also become, like Lebanon, a place used by outside powers to
further their own aims. Russia, Iran and Lebanese Hezbollah support the
Syrian government forces. The Arab countries support the opposition, but
different states support different opposition groups: the Saudis and
Qataris, for example, are both vying for influence, but each backs a
different proxy to achieve it.

It will require skill, courage and an element so often lacking –
compromise – to hold many of these regions together as a single,
governable space. Especially as Sunni jihadist fighters are trying to
pull them apart in order to widen their ‘caliphate’.

Groups such as Al Qaeda and, more recently, Islamic State have garnered
what support they have partially because of the humiliation caused by
colonialism and then the failure of pan-Arab nationalism – and <span
id="chapter06.html#page_133"></span>to an extent the Arab nation state.
Arab leaders have failed to deliver prosperity or freedom, and the siren
call of Islamism, which promises to solve all problems, has proved
attractive to many in a region marked by a toxic mix of piety,
unemployment and repression. The Islamists hark back to a golden age
when Islam ruled an empire and was at the cutting edge of technology,
art, medicine and government. They have helped bring to the surface the
ancient suspicions of ‘the other’ throughout the Middle East.

Islamic State grew out of the ‘Al Qaeda in Iraq’ franchise group in the
late 2000s, which nominally was directed by the remnants of the Al Qaeda
leadership. By the time the Syrian Civil War was in full flow the group
had split from Al Qaeda and renamed itself. At first it was known by the
outside world as ISIL (‘Islamic State In the Levant’) but as the Arabic
word for the Levant is Al Sham, gradually it became ISIS. In the summer
of 2014 the group began calling itself Islamic State, having proclaimed
such an entity in large parts of Iraq and Syria.

It quickly became the ‘go to’ jihadist group, drawing thousands of
foreign Muslims to the cause, partially due to its pious romanticism and
partially for its brutality. Its main attraction, though, was its
success in creating a caliphate; where Al Qaeda murdered people and
captured headlines, IS murdered people and captured territory.

IS also seized upon an area that is increasingly important in the
internet age – psychological space. It built on the pioneering work of
Al Qaeda in social media and took it to new heights of sophistication
and brutality. By 2015 IS was ahead of any government in levels of
public messaging using jihadists brought up on the sometimes brutalising
effects of the internet and its obsession with violence and sex. They
are Generation Jackass Jihadis and they are ahead of the deadly game.

Sunni Islamist fighters from across the globe, drawn like moths to the
light of a billion pixels, have taken advantage of the three-way split
between Kurds, Sunni and Shia in Iraq. They offer the Sunni Arabs a
<span id="chapter06.html#page_134"></span>heady mix of the promise of
restoring them to their ‘rightful’ place as the dominant force in the
region, and the re-establishment of the caliphate in which their version
of all true believers (Sunni Muslims) live under one ruler.

However, it is the very fanaticism of their beliefs and practices that
explains why they cannot achieve their utopian fantasies.

Firstly, only some of the Sunni Iraqi tribes will support the jihadist
aims, and even then only to achieve their own ends – which do not
include a return to the sixth century. Once they get what they want they
will then turn on the jihadists, especially the foreign ones. Secondly,
the jihadists have demonstrated that there is no mercy for anyone who
opposes them and that being a non-Sunni is akin to a death sentence. So,
all non-Sunni Muslims and all the minorities in Iraq, Christians,
Chaldeans, Yazidis and others, are against them, as are dozens of
Western and Muslim countries.

The non-jihadist Iraqi Sunnis are in a difficult position. In the event
of either a fragmented or a legally federalised Iraq they are stuck in
the middle, surrounded by sand in an area that is known as the Sunni
Triangle, with its points roughly located just east of Baghdad, west of
Ramadi and north of Tikrit. Sunnis living here often have more in common
with their related tribes in Syria than they do with the Kurds in the
north or the Shia of the south.

There is not enough economic diversity within the triangle to sustain a
Sunni entity. History bequeathed oil to ‘Iraq’, but the de facto
division of the country means the oil is mostly in the Kurdish and Shia
areas; and if there is no strong, unified Iraq, then the oil money flows
back to where the oil is found. The Kurdish lands cannot be brought
under their control, the cities south of Baghdad such as Najaf and
Karbala are overwhelmingly Shia, and the ports of Basra and Umm Qasr are
far away from the Sunni territory. This dilemma leaves the Sunnis
fighting for an equal share in a country they once ruled, sometimes
toying with the idea <span id="chapter06.html#page_135"></span>of
separation, but knowing that their future would probably be self-rule
over not very much.

In the event of a split the Shia are geographically best placed to take
advantage. The region they dominate has oilfields, 35 miles of
coastline, the Shatt al-Arab waterway, ports, access to the outside
world and a religious, economic and military ally next door in the form
of Iran.

The jihadist fantasy is global domination by Salafi Islam. In their more
lucid, yet still wild, moments they plan, and fight, for a more limited
aim – a caliphate throughout the Middle East. One of the jihadists’
battle cries is ‘From Mosul to Jerusalem!’, meaning that they hope to
control the area from Mosul in Iraq right across to Beirut in Lebanon,
Amman in Jordan and Jerusalem in Israel. However, the real size of
Islamic State’s geographical caliphate is limited by its capabilities.

This is not to underestimate the problem or the scale of what may be the
Arab version of Europe’s Thirty Years’ War (1618–48). It is not just a
Middle Eastern problem. Many of the international jihadists who survive
will return home to Europe, North America, Indonesia, the Caucasus and
Bangladesh, where they are unlikely to settle for a quiet life. The
intelligence services in London believe there are far more British
Muslims fighting in the Middle East for jihadist groups than there are
serving in the British Army. The radicalisation programme undertaken by
the Islamists began several decades before the de-radicalisation
initiatives now under way in European countries.

Most countries in the region face their own version of this generational
struggle to a greater or lesser degree. Saudi Arabia, for example, has
taken on Al Qaeda cells over the past decade but, having mostly taken
them apart, it now faces renewed challenges from the next generation of
jihadists. It has another problem in the south, on the border with
Yemen, which itself is blighted with violence, separatist movements and
a strong jihadist element.

<span id="chapter06.html#page_136"></span>There is also a simmering
Islamist movement in Jordan, especially in the town of Zarqa, in the
north-east towards the Syrian and Iraqi borders, which is home to some
of the several thousand supporters of groups such as Al Qaeda and
Islamic State. The authorities are fearful of a jihadist group in Iraq
or Syria reaching the now fragile borders in strength and crossing into
Jordan. The British-trained Jordanian Army is thought to be one of the
most robust in the Middle East, but it might struggle to cope if local
Islamists and foreign fighters took to the streets in guerrilla warfare.
If the Palestinian Jordanians declined to defend the country it is not
unrealistic to believe that it would descend into the sort of chaos we
now see in Syria. This is the last thing the Hashemite rulers want – and
it’s the last thing the Israelis want as well.

The battle for the future of the Arab Middle East has to an extent taken
the spotlight off the Israeli-Arab struggle. The fixation with Israel/
Palestine does sometimes return, but the magnitude of what is going on
elsewhere has finally enabled at least some observers to understand that
the problems of the region are not down to the existence of Israel. That
was a lie peddled by the Arab dictators as they sought to deflect
attention from their own brutality, and it was bought by many people
across the area and the dictators’ useful idiots in the West.
Nevertheless the Israeli/ Palestinian joint tragedy continues, and such
is the obsession with this tiny piece of land that it may again come to
be considered by some to be the most pressing conflict in the world.

The Ottomans had regarded the area west of the River Jordan to the
Mediterranean Coast as a part of the region of Syria. They called it
Filistina. After the First World War, under the British Mandate this
became Palestine.

The Jews had lived in what used to be called Israel for millennia, but
the ravages of history had dispersed them across the globe. Israel
remained for them the ‘promised land’ and Jerusalem in particular was
<span id="chapter06.html#page_137"></span>sacred ground. However, by
1948 Arab Muslims and Christians had been a clear majority in the land
for more than a thousand years.

In the twentieth century, with the introduction of the Mandate for
Palestine, the Jewish movement to join their minority co-religionists
grew and, propelled by the pogroms in Eastern Europe, more and more Jews
began to settle there. The British looked favourably on the creation of
a ‘Jewish homeland’ in Palestine and allowed Jews to move there and buy
land from the Arabs. After the Second World War and the Holocaust, Jews
tried to get to Palestine in even greater numbers. Tensions between Jews
and non-Jews reached boiling point, and an exhausted Britain handed over
the problem to the United Nations in 1948, which voted to partition the
region into two countries. The Jews agreed, the Arabs said ‘No’. The
outcome was war, which created the first wave of Palestinian refugees
fleeing the area and Jewish refugees coming in from across the Middle
East.

Jordan occupied the West Bank region, including East Jerusalem. Egypt
occupied Gaza, considering it to be an extension of its territory.
Neither was minded to give the people living there citizenship or
statehood as Palestinians, nor was there any significant movement by the
inhabitants calling for the creation of a Palestinian state. Syria,
meanwhile, considered the whole area to be part of greater Syria and the
people living there as Syrians.

To this day Egypt, Syria and Jordan are suspicious of Palestinian
independence, and if Israel vanished and was replaced by Palestine, all
three might make claims to parts of the territory. In this century,
however, there is a fierce sense of nationhood among the Palestinians,
and any Arab dictatorship seeking to take a chunk out of a Palestinian
state of whatever shape or size would be met with massive opposition.
The Palestinians are very aware that most of the Arab countries, to
which some of them fled in the twentieth century, refuse to give them
citizenship; these countries insist that the status of their children
and grandchildren remains ‘refugee’, and work to ensure that they do not
integrate into the country.

<span
id="chapter06.html#page_138"></span>![illustration](media/prisoners-of-geography-assets/images/f0138-01.png)

The Golan Heights, the West Bank and Gaza remain contested territory
following the Six-Day War in 1967.

During the Six-Day War of 1967 the Israelis won control of all of
Jerusalem, the West Bank and Gaza. In 2005 they left Gaza, but hundreds
of thousands of settlers remain in the West Bank.

Israel regards Jerusalem as its eternal, indivisible capital. The Jewish
religion says the rock upon which Abraham prepared to sacrifice Isaac is
there, and that it stands directly above the Holy of Holies, <span
id="chapter06.html#page_139"></span>King Solomon’s Temple. For the
Palestinians Jerusalem has a religious resonance which runs deep
throughout the Muslim world: the city is regarded as the third most holy
place in Islam because the Prophet Muhammad is said to have ascended to
heaven from that same rock, which is on the site of what is now the
‘Furthest Mosque’ (Al Aqsa). Militarily the city is of only moderate
strategic geographical importance – it has no real industry to speak of,
no river and no airport – but it is of overwhelming significance in
cultural and religious terms: the ideological need for the place is of
more importance than its location. Control of, and access to, Jerusalem
is not an issue upon which a compromise solution can be easily achieved.

In comparison, Gaza was easier for the Israelis to give up (although it
was still difficult). Whether the people living there have gained much
by the Israeli departure, however, is open to debate.

Gaza is by far the worse off of the two current Palestinian ‘entities’.
It is only 25 miles long and 7.5 miles wide. Crammed into this space are
1.8 million people. It is in effect a ‘city state’, albeit a horribly
impoverished one. Due to the conflict with Israel its citizens are
penned in on three sides by a security barrier created by Israel and
Egypt, and by the sea to their west. They can only build to within a
certain distance of the border with Israel because the Israelis are
trying to limit the ability of rocket fire from Gaza to reach deep into
Israel. The last decade has seen an asymmetric arms race gain pace, with
militants in Gaza seeking rockets that can fire further, and Israel
developing its anti-missile defence system.

Because of its urban density Gaza makes good fighting ground for its
defenders but it is a nightmare for its civilians, who have little or no
shelter from war and no link to the West Bank, although the distance
between the two is only 25 miles at its narrowest point. Until a peace
deal is agreed there is nowhere for the Gazans to go, and little for
them to do at home.

<span id="chapter06.html#page_140"></span>The West Bank is almost seven
times the size of Gaza but is landlocked. Much of it comprises a
mountain ridge which runs north to south. From a military perspective,
this gives whoever commands the high ground control of the coastal plain
on the western side of the ridge, and of the Jordan Rift Valley to its
east. Leaving to one side the ideology of Jewish settlers, who claim the
biblical right to live in what they call Judea and Samaria, from a
military perspective the Israeli view is that a non-Israeli force cannot
be allowed to control these heights, as heavy weapons could be fired
onto the coastal plain where 70 per cent of Israel’s population lives.
The plain also includes its most important road systems, many of its
successful high-tech companies, the international airport and most of
its heavy industry.

This is one reason for the demand for ‘security’ by the Israeli side and
its insistence that, even if there is an independent Palestinian state,
that state cannot have an army with heavy weapons on the ridge, and that
Israel must also maintain control of the border with Jordan. Because
Israel is so small it has no real ‘strategic depth’, nowhere to fall
back to if its defences are breached, and so militarily it concentrates
on trying to ensure no one can get near it. Furthermore, the distance
from the West Bank border to Tel Aviv is about 10 miles at its
narrowest; from the West Bank ridge, any half decent military could cut
Israel in two. Likewise, in the case of the West Bank Israel prevents
any group from becoming powerful enough to threaten its existence.

Under current conditions Israel faces threats to its security and to the
lives of its citizens by terrorist attacks and rocket fire from its
immediate neighbours, but not a threat to its very existence. Egypt, to
the southwest, is not a threat. There is a peace treaty that currently
suits both sides, and the partially demilitarised Sinai Peninsula acts
as a buffer between them. East of this, across the Red Sea at Aqaba in
Jordan, the desert also protects Israel, as does its peace treaty with
Amman. To the north there is a potential menace from Lebanon but it is a
relatively small <span id="chapter06.html#page_141"></span>one, in the
form of cross-border raids and/or limited shelling. However, if and when
Hezbollah in Lebanon use their larger and longer-range rockets to reach
deep into Israel, the response will be massive.

The more serious potential threat comes from Lebanon’s bigger neighbour
Syria. Historically, Damascus wants and needs direct access to the
coast. It has always regarded Lebanon as part of Syria (as indeed it
was) and remains bitter about its troops having been forced to leave in
2005. If that route to the sea is blocked, the alternative is to cross
the Golan Heights and descend to the hilly region around the Sea of
Galilee en route to the Mediterranean. But the Heights were seized by
Israel after Syria attacked it in the 1973 war, and it would take an
enormous onslaught by a Syrian army to break through to the coastal
plain leading to the major Israeli population centres. This cannot be
discounted at some future point, but in the medium term it remains
extremely unlikely, and – as long as the Syrian civil war continues –
impossible.

That leaves the question of Iran – a more serious consideration as it
raises the issue of nuclear weapons.

Iran is a non-Arabic, majority Farsi-speaking giant. It is bigger than
France, Germany and the UK combined, but while the populations of those
countries amount to 200 million people, Iran has only 78 million. With
limited habitable space, most live in the mountains; the great deserts
and salt plains of the interior of Iran are no place for human
habitation. Just driving through them can subdue the human spirit, and
living in them is a struggle few undertake.

There are two huge mountain ranges in Iran: the Zagros and the Elburz.
The Zagros runs from the north, 900 miles down along Iran’s borders with
Turkey and Iraq, ending almost at the Strait of Hormuz in the Gulf. In
the southern half of the range there is a plain to the west where the
Shatt al-Arab divides Iran and Iraq. This is also where the major
Iranian oilfields are, the others being in the north and centre.
Together they are thought to comprise the world’s third-largest
reserves. <span id="chapter06.html#page_142"></span>Despite this Iran
remains relatively poor due to mismanagement, corruption, mountainous
topography that hinders transport connections and economic sanctions
which have, in part, prevented certain sections of industry from
modernising.

The Elburz range also begins in the north, but along the border with
Armenia. It runs the whole length of the Caspian Sea’s south shore and
on to the border with Turkmenistan before descending as it reaches
Afghanistan. This is the mountain range you can see from the capital,
Tehran, towering above the city to its north. It provides spectacular
views, and also a better-kept secret than the Iranian nuclear project:
the skiing conditions are excellent for several months each year.

Iran is defended by this geography, with mountains on three sides,
swampland and water on the fourth. The Mongols were the last force to
make any progress through the territory in 1219–21 and since then
attackers have ground themselves into dust trying to make headway across
the mountains. By the time of the Second Gulf War in 2003 even the USA,
the greatest fighting force the world has seen, thought better than to
take a right turn once it had entered Iraq from the south, knowing that
even with its superior firepower Iran was not a country to invade. In
fact, the US military had a catchphrase at the time: ‘We do deserts, not
mountains.’

In 1980, when the Iran–Iraq War broke out, the Iraqis used six divisions
to cross the Shatt al-Arab in an attempt to annex the Iranian province
of Khuzestan. They never even made it off the swamp-ridden plains, let
alone entered the foothills of the Zagros. The war dragged on for eight
years, taking at least a million lives.

The mountainous terrain of Iran means that it is difficult to create an
interconnected economy, and that it has many minority groups each with
keenly defined characteristics. Khuzestan, for example, is ethnically
majority Arab, and elsewhere there are Kurds, Azeri, Turkmen and
Georgians, among others. At most 60 per cent of the country speaks <span
id="chapter06.html#page_143"></span>Farsi, the language of the dominant
Persian majority. As a result of this diversity, Iran has traditionally
centralised power and used force and a fearsome intelligence network to
maintain internal stability. Tehran knows that no one is about to invade
Iran, but also that hostile powers can use its minorities to try and
stir dissent and thus endanger its Islamic revolution.

Iran also has a nuclear industry which many countries, particularly
Israel, believe is being used to prepare for the construction of nuclear
weapons, increasing tensions in the region. The Israelis feel threatened
by the prospect of Iranian nuclear weapons. It is not just Iran’s
potential to rival their own arsenal and wipe out Israel with just one
bomb: if Iran were to get the bomb, then the Arab countries would
probably panic and attempt to get theirs as well. The Saudis, for
example, fear that the Ayatollahs want to dominate the region, bring all
the Shia Arabs under their guidance, and even have designs on
controlling the holy cities of Mecca and Medina. A nuclear-armed Iran
would be the regional superpower par excellence, and to counter this
danger the Saudis would probably try to buy nuclear weapons from
Pakistan (with whom they have close ties). Egypt and Turkey might follow
suit.

This means that the threat of an Israeli air strike on Iran’s nuclear
facilities is a constant presence, but there are many restraining
factors. One is that in a straight line it is 1,000 miles from Israel to
Iran. The Israeli air force would need to cross two sovereign borders,
those of Jordan and Iraq; the latter would certainly tell Iran that the
attack was coming. Another is that any other route requires refuelling
capabilities which may be beyond Israel, and which (if flying the
northern route) also overfly sovereign territory. A final reason is that
Iran holds what might be a trump card – the ability to close the Strait
of Hormuz in the Gulf through which passes each day, depending on sales,
about 20 per cent of the world’s oil needs. At its narrowest point the
Strait, which is regarded as the most strategic in the world, is only 21
miles across. The <span
id="chapter06.html#page_144"></span>industrialised world fears the
effect of Hormuz being closed possibly for months on end, with ensuing
spiralling prices. This is one reason why so many countries pressure
Israel not to act.

In the 2000s the Iranians feared encirclement by the Americans. The US
navy was in the Gulf, and American troops were in Iraq and Afghanistan.
With the military drawdowns in both countries Iranian fears have now
faded, and Iran is left in the dominant position with a direct line to
its allies in Shia-dominated Iraq. The south of Iraq is also a bridge
for Iran to its Alawite allies in Damascus, and then to its Shia allies
in the form of Hezbollah in Lebanon on the Mediterranean coast.

In the sixth to the fourth centuries <small>BCE</small> the Persian
Empire stretched all the way from Egypt to India. Modern-day Iran has no
such imperial designs, but it does seek to expand its influence, and the
obvious direction is across the flatlands to its west – the Arab world
and its Shia minorities. It has made ground in Iraq since the US
invasion delivered a Shia-majority government. This has alarmed
Sunni-dominated Saudi Arabia and helped fuel the Middle East’s version
of the Cold War with the Saudi-Iranian relationship at its core. Saudi
Arabia may be bigger than Iran, it may be many times richer than Iran
due to its well-developed oil and gas industries, but its population is
much smaller (28 million Saudis as opposed to 78 million Iranians) and
militarily it is not confident about its ability to take on its Persian
neighbour if this cold war ever turns hot and their forces confront each
other directly. Each side has ambitions to be the dominant power in the
region, and each regards itself as the champion of its respective
version of Islam. When Iraq was under the heel of Saddam, a powerful
buffer separated Saudi Arabia and Iran; with that buffer gone, the two
countries now glare at each other across the Gulf.

West of Iran is a country that is both European and Asian. Turkey lies
on the borders of the Arab lands but is not Arabic, and although most of
<span id="chapter06.html#page_145"></span>its land mass is part of the
wider Middle East region, it tries to distance itself from the conflicts
taking place there.

The Turks have never been truly recognised as part of Europe by their
neighbours to the north and north-west. If Turkey *is* European, then
Europe’s borders are on the far side of the vast Anatolian Plain,
meaning they stop at Syria, Iraq and Iran. This is a concept few people
accept. If it is *not* part of Europe, then where is it? Its greatest
city, Istanbul, was European City of Culture 2010, it competes in the
Eurovision Song Contest and the UEFA European Championship, it applied
for membership of what is now the European Union in the 1970s; and yet
less than 5 per cent of its territory is in Europe. Most geographers
regard the small area of Turkey which is west of the Bosporus as being
in Europe, and the rest of the country, south and south-east of the
Bosporus, as being in the Middle East (in its widest sense).

That is one reason why Turkey has never been accepted into the EU. Other
factors are its record on human rights, especially when it comes to the
Kurds, and its economy. Its population is 75 million and European
countries fear that, given the disparity in living standards, EU
membership would result in a mass influx of labour. What may also be a
factor, albeit unspoken within the EU, is that Turkey is a majority
Muslim country (98 per cent). The EU is neither a secular nor a
Christian organisation, but there has been a difficult debate about
‘values’. For each argument for Turkey’s EU membership there is an
argument against, and in the past decade the prospects for Turkey
joining have diminished. This has led the country to reflect on what
other choices there may be.

In the 1920s, for one man at least, there was no choice. His name was
Mustafa Kemal and he was the only Turkish general to emerge from the
First World War with an enhanced reputation. After the victorious powers
carved up Turkey he rose to become president on a platform of resisting
the terms imposed by the Allies, but at the same time modernising Turkey
and making it part of Europe. Western legal codes <span
id="chapter06.html#page_146"></span>and the Gregorian calendar were
introduced and Islamic public institutions banned. The wearing of the
fez was forbidden, the Latin alphabet replaced Arabic script, and he
even granted the vote to women (two years ahead of Spain and fifteen
years ahead of France). In 1934, when Turks embraced legally binding
surnames, Kemal was given the name ‘Atatürk’ – ‘Father of the Turks’. He
died in 1938 but subsequent Turkish leaders continued working to bring
Turkey into the West European fold, and those that didn’t found
themselves on the wrong end of coups d’état by a military determined to
complete Atatürk’s legacy.

By the late 1980s, however, the continued rejection by Europe and the
stubborn refusal of many ordinary Turks to become less religious
resulted in a generation of politicians who began to think the
unthinkable – that perhaps Turkey needed a Plan B. President Turgut
Özal, a religious man, came to office in 1989 and began the change. He
encouraged Turks again to see Turkey as the great land bridge between
Europe, Asia and the Middle East, and a country which could again be a
great power in all three regions. The current President, Recep Tayyib
Erdoğan, has similar ambitions, perhaps even greater ones, but has faced
similar hurdles in achieving them. These are in part geographical.

Politically, the Arab countries remain suspicious that Erdoğan wants to
recreate the Ottoman Empire economically and they resist close ties. The
Iranians see Turkey as their most powerful military and economic
competitor in their own backyard. Relations, never warm, have cooled due
to them being on opposite sides in support for factions involved in the
Syrian civil war. Turkey’s strong support for the Muslim Brotherhood
government in Egypt was a policy that backfired when the Egyptian
military staged its second coup and took power. Relations between Cairo
and Ankara are now icy.

The Turkish elite have learnt that scoring Islamist points by picking
fights with Israel results in Israel co-operating with Cyprus and Greece
to create a trilateral energy alliance to exploit the gas fields off
their <span id="chapter06.html#page_147"></span>respective coasts. The
Egyptian government’s dim view of Turkey is contributing to Cairo’s
interest in being a major customer for this new energy source. Meanwhile
Turkey, which could have benefited from Israeli energy, remains largely
reliant on its old foe Russia for its energy needs whilst simultaneously
working with Russia to develop new pipelines to deliver energy to EU
countries.

The Americans, alarmed at the new cold war between Turkey and Israel,
two of its allies, are working to bring them together again. The USA
wants a better relationship between them so as to strengthen NATO’s
position in the eastern Mediterranean. In NATO terms, Turkey is a key
country because it controls the entrance to and exit from the Black Sea
through the narrow gap of the Bosporus Strait. If it closes the Strait,
which is less than a mile across at its narrowest point, the Russian
Black Sea Fleet cannot break out into the Mediterranean and then the
Atlantic. Even getting through the Bosporus only takes you into the Sea
of Marmara; you still have to navigate through the Dardanelles Straits
to get to the Aegean Sea en route to the Mediterranean.

Given its land mass Turkey is not often thought of as a sea power, but
it borders three seas and its control of these waters has always made it
a force to be reckoned with; it is also a trade and transportation
bridge linking Europe with the Middle East, the Caucasus and on up to
the Central Asian countries, with which it shares history and, in some
regions, ethnic ties.

Turkey is determined to be at the crossroads of history even if the
traffic can at times be hazardous. The webpage of the Turkish Foreign
Ministry emphasises this in the section ‘Synopsis of Foreign Policy’:
‘The Afro-Eurasian geography where Turkey is situated at the epicentre
is an area where such opportunities and risks interact in the most
intensive way.’ It also says: ‘Turkey is determined to become a full
member of the European Union as part of its bicentennial effort to reach
the highest level of contemporary civilisation.’

<span id="chapter06.html#page_148"></span>That looks unlikely in the
short to medium term. Until a few years ago Turkey was held up as an
example of how a Middle Eastern country, other than Israel, could
embrace democracy. That example has taken a few knocks recently with the
ongoing Kurdish problem, the difficulties facing some of the tiny
Christian communities and the tacit support for Islamist groups in their
fight against the Syrian government. President Erdoğan’s remarks on
Jews, race and gender equality, taken with the creeping Islamisation of
Turkey, have set alarm bells ringing. However, compared with the
majority of Arab states Turkey is far more developed and recognisable as
a democracy. Erdoğan may be undoing some of Atatürk’s work, but the
grandchildren of the Father of the Turks live more freely than anyone in
the Arab Middle East.

Because the Arab states have not experienced a similar opening-up and
have suffered from colonialism, they were not ready to turn the Arab
uprisings (the wave of protests that started in 2010) into a real Arab
Spring. Instead they soured into perpetual rioting and civil war.

The Arab Spring is a misnomer, invented by the media; it clouds our
understanding of what is happening. Too many reporters rushed to
interview the young liberals who were standing in city squares with
placards written in English, and mistook them for the voice of the
people and the direction of history. Some journalists had done the same
during the ‘Green Revolution’, describing the young students of north
Tehran as the ‘Youth of Iran’, thus ignoring the other young Iranians
who were joining the reactionary Basij militia and Revolutionary Guard.

In 1989 in Eastern Europe there was one form of totalitarianism:
Communism. In the majority of people’s minds there was only one
direction in which to go: towards democracy, which was thriving on the
other side of the Iron Curtain. East and West shared a historical memory
of periods of democracy and civil society. The Arab world of 2011
enjoyed none of those things and faced in many different directions.
There were, and are, the directions of democracy, liberal democracy
(which differs <span id="chapter06.html#page_149"></span>from the
former), nationalism, the cult of the strong leader and the direction in
which many people had been facing all along – Islam in its various
guises, including Islamism.

In the Middle East power does indeed flow from the barrel of a gun. Some
good citizens of Misrata in Libya may want to develop a liberal
democratic party, some might even want to campaign for gay rights; but
their choice will be limited if the local de facto power shoots liberal
democrats and gays. Iraq is a case in point: a democracy in name only,
far from liberal, and a place where people are routinely murdered for
being homosexual.

The second phase of the Arab uprising is well into its stride. This is
the complex internal struggle within societies where religious beliefs,
social mores, tribal links and guns are currently far more powerful
forces than ‘Western’ ideals of equality, freedom of expression and
universal suffrage. The Arab countries are beset by prejudices, indeed
hatreds of which the average Westerner knows so little that they tend
not to believe them even if they are laid out in print before their
eyes. We are aware of our own prejudices, which are legion, but often
seem to turn a blind eye to those in the Middle East.

The routine expression of hatred for others is so common in the Arab
world that it barely draws comment other than from the region’s often
Western-educated liberal minority who have limited access to the
platform of mass media. Anti-Semitic cartoons which echo the Nazi *Der
Stürmer* propaganda newspaper are common. Week in, week out, shock-jock
Imams are given space on prime-time TV shows.

Western apologists for this sort of behaviour are sometimes hamstrung by
a fear of being described as one of Edward Said’s ‘Orientalists’. They
betray their own liberal values by denying their universality. Others,
in their naivety, say that these incitements to murder are not
widespread and must be seen in the context of the Arabic language, which
can be given to flights of rhetoric. This signals their lack of
understanding of <span id="chapter06.html#page_150"></span>the ‘Arab
street’, the role of the mainstream Arab media and a refusal to
understand that when people who are full of hatred say something, they
mean it.

When Hosni Mubarak was ousted as President of Egypt it was indeed people
power that toppled him, but what the outside world failed to see was
that the military had been waiting for years for an opportunity to be
rid of him and his son Gamal, and that the theatre of the street
provided the cover they needed. It was only when the Muslim Brotherhood
called its supporters out that there was enough cover. There were only
three institutions in Egypt: Mubarak’s National Democratic Party, the
military and the Brotherhood. The latter two destroyed the former, the
Brotherhood then won an election, began turning Egypt into an Islamist
state, and paid the price by itself being overthrown by the real power
in the land – the military.

The Islamists remain the second power, albeit now underground. When the
anti-Mubarak demonstrations were at their height the gatherings in Cairo
attracted several hundred thousand people. After Mubarak’s fall, when
the radical Muslim Brotherhood preacher Yusuf al-Qaradawi returned from
exile in Qatar, at least a million people came out to greet him, but few
in the Western media called this the ‘voice of the people’. The liberals
never had a chance. Nor do they now. This is not because the people of
the region are radical; it is because if you are hungry and frightened,
and you are offered either bread and security or the concept of
democracy, the choice is not difficult.

In impoverished societies with few accountable institutions, power rests
with gangs disguised as ‘militia’ and ‘political parties’. While they
fight for power, sometimes cheered on by naive Western sympathisers,
many innocent people die. It looks as if it will be that way in Libya,
Syria, Yemen, Iraq and possibly other countries for years to come.

The Americans are keen to scale down their political and military
investment in the region due to a reduction in their energy import <span
id="chapter06.html#page_151"></span>requirements; if they do withdraw
then China, and to a lesser extent India, may have to get involved in
equal proportion to the US loss of interest. The Chinese are already
major players in Saudi Arabia, Iraq and Iran. That scenario is on a
global level and will be determined in the chancelleries of the capitals
of the great powers. On the ground the game will be played with people’s
imaginations, wants, hopes and needs, and with their lives.

Sykes-Picot is breaking; putting it back together, even in a different
shape, will be a long and bloody affair.

<span id="chapter07.html"></span>

<span id="chapter07.html#page_152"></span><span id="chapter07.html#page_153"></span>CHAPTER 7 []
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**INDIA AND PAKISTAN** []
----------------------

 

*‘India is not a nation, nor a country. It is a subcontinent of
nationalities.’*  
Muhammad Ali Jinnah

<span id="chapter07.html#page_154"></span><span
id="chapter07.html#page_155"></span>![illustration](media/prisoners-of-geography-assets/images/f0154-01.png)

 

<span id="chapter07.html#page_156"></span><span
class="big">I</span><small>NDIA AND PAKISTAN CAN AGREE ON ONE THING:
NEITHER WANTS</small> the other one around. This is somewhat problematic
given that they share a 1,900-mile long border. Each country fairly
bristles with antagonism and nuclear weapons, so how they manage this
unwanted relationship is a matter of life and death on a scale of tens
of millions.

India has a population approaching 1.3 billion people, while Pakistan’s
is 182 million. Impoverished, volatile and splintering, Pakistan appears
to define itself by its opposition to India, while India, despite
obsessing about Pakistan, defines itself in many ways, including that of
being an emerging world power with a growing economy and an expanding
middle class. From this vantage point it looks across at Pakistan and
sees how it outperforms it on almost all economic and democratic
indicators.

They have fought four major wars and many skirmishes. Emotions run hot.
An oft-quoted remark by a Pakistani officer that Pakistan would make
India bleed by a thousand cuts was addressed in late 2014 by military
analyst Dr Amarjit Singh writing in the *Indian Defence Review:*
‘Whatever others may believe, my opinion is simply that it is better for
India to brave a costly nuclear attack by Pakistan, and get it over with
even at the cost of tens of millions of deaths, than suffer ignominy and
pain day in and day out through a thousand cuts and wasted energy in
unrealized potential.’ That may not reflect official government policy,
but it is an indication of the depth of feeling at many levels in both
societies. Modern Pakistan and India were born in fire; next time the
fire could kill them.

<span id="chapter07.html#page_157"></span>The two are tied together
within the geography of the Indian subcontinent, which creates a natural
frame. The Bay of Bengal, the Indian Ocean and the Arabian Sea are
respectively to the south-east, south, and south-west, the Hindu Kush to
the north-west, and the Himalayas to the north. Moving clockwise, the
plateau of the Baluchistan Desert climbs steadily before becoming the
mountains of the North West Frontier, which rise even higher to become
the Hindu Kush. A right turn east connects to the Karakoram Range, which
then leads to the Himalayas. They sweep right along the border with
China all the way to Burma. From there, as India curves around
Bangladesh, the terrain descends south to the Bay of Bengal.

The interior of the frame contains what are modern-day India, Pakistan,
Bangladesh, Nepal and Bhutan. The latter two are impoverished landlocked
nations dominated by their giant neighbours, China and India.
Bangladesh’s problem is not that it lacks access to the sea, but that
the sea has too much access to Bangladesh: flooding from the waters of
the Bay of Bengal constantly afflicts the low-lying territory. Its other
geographical problem is that it is almost entirely surrounded by India,
because the 2,545-mile long frontier, agreed in 1974, wrapped India
around Bangladesh, leaving it only a short border with Burma as an
alternative land route to the outside world.

Bangladesh is volatile, and contains Islamist militants which trouble
India; but none of these three smaller countries within the subcontinent
can ever rise to threaten its undisputed master. Nor would Pakistan be
considered a threat to India had it not mastered the technology of
developing nuclear weapons in the decades following the partition of the
region in 1947.

The area within our frame, despite being relatively flat, has always
been too large and diverse to have strong central rule. Even the British
colonial overlords, with their famed bureaucracy and connecting rail
system, allowed regional autonomy and indeed used it to play local
leaders <span id="chapter07.html#page_158"></span>off against each
other. The linguistic and cultural diversity is partially due to the
differences in climate – for example, the freezing north of the
Himalayas in contrast to the jungles of the south – but it is also
because of the subcontinent’s rivers and religions.

Various civilisations have grown up along these rivers, such as the
Ganges, the Brahmaputra and the Indus. To this day the population
centres are dotted along their banks, and the regions, so different from
each other – for example the Punjab, with its Sikh majority, and the
Tamil speakers of Tamil Nadu – are based on these geographical divides.

Different powers have invaded the subcontinent over the centuries, but
none have ever truly conquered it. Even now New Delhi does not truly
control India and, as we shall see, to an even greater extent Islamabad
does not control Pakistan. The Muslims had the greatest success in
uniting the subcontinent under one leadership, but even Islam never
overcame the linguistic, religious and cultural differences.

The first Muslim invasion was as early as the eighth century
<small>CE</small>, when the Arabs of the Umayyad Caliphate made it as
far as the Punjab in what is now Pakistan. From then until the
eighteenth century various foreign invasions brought Islam to the
subcontinent; however, east of the Indus River Valley a majority of the
Hindu population resisted conversion, thus sowing the seeds for the
eventual partition of India.

The British came, and went, and when they went the centre could not
hold, and things fell apart. In truth, there was no real centre: the
region has always been divided by the ancient disparities of the
languages of the Punjab and Gujarat, the mountains and the deserts, and
Islam and Hinduism. By 1947 the forces of post-colonial nationalism and
religious separatism broke the subcontinent into two, and later three,
major pieces: India, Pakistan and Bangladesh. The British, exhausted by
two world wars, and aware that the days of empire were coming to a
close, did not cover themselves in glory in the manner of their leaving.

On 3 June 1947 the announcement was made in the House of <span
id="chapter07.html#page_159"></span>Commons: the British would withdraw
– India was to be partitioned into the two independent dominions of
India and Pakistan. Seventy-three days later, on 15 August, they were
all but gone.

An extraordinary movement of people followed as millions of Muslims fled
the new borders of India, heading west to Pakistan, with millions of
Hindus and Sikhs coming the other way. Columns of people 30,000-strong
were on the roads as whole communities moved. Trains packed full of
refugees criss-crossed the subcontinent disgorging people into cities
and making the return journey filled with those heading in the other
direction.

It was carnage. Riots broke out across both countries as Muslims,
Hindus, Sikhs and others turned on each other in panic and fear. The
British government washed its hands and refused pleas from the new
Indian and Pakistani leaders for the few troops still in the country to
help maintain order. Estimates of the death toll vary, but at least a
million people died and 15 million were displaced. The Muslim-majority
areas in the west – the Indus Valley region west of the Thar Desert and
the Ganges River basin – became West Pakistan while those to the east of
Calcutta (now Kolkata) became East Pakistan.

What did Pakistan get out of this? Much less than India. It inherited
India’s most troublesome border, the North West Frontier with
Afghanistan, and it was a state split into two non-contiguous regions
with little to hold it together as 1,000 miles of Indian territory
separated West Pakistan from East Pakistan. Alaska and the rest of the
USA have managed the problem of non-contiguous distance without
difficulty, but they are culturally, linguistically and economically
linked and operating in a stable environment. The only connection
between the two parts of Pakistan was Islam. They never really came
together, so it was no surprise when they were torn apart; in 1971 East
Pakistan rebelled against the dominance of West Pakistan, India
intervened and, after much bloodshed, East Pakistan seceded, becoming
Bangladesh.

<span id="chapter07.html#page_160"></span>However, back in 1947,
twenty-five years after the end of the Ottoman Empire, Jinnah and the
other leaders of the new Pakistan, amid much fanfare and promises of a
bright future, claimed they had created a united Muslim homeland.

Pakistan is geographically, economically, demographically and militarily
weaker than India. Its national identity is also not as strong. India,
despite its size, cultural diversity, and secessionist movements, has
built a solid secular democracy with a unified sense of Indian identity.
Pakistan is an Islamic state with a history of dictatorship and
populations whose loyalty is often more to their cultural region than to
the state.

Secular democracy has served India well, but the 1947 division did give
it a head start. Within the new borders of India was the vast majority
of the subcontinent’s industry, most of the taxable income base and the
majority of the major cities. For example Calcutta, with its port and
banking sector, went to India, thus depriving East Pakistan of this
major income provider and connection to the outside world.

Pakistan received just 17 per cent of the financial reserves which had
been controlled by the pre-partition government. It was left with an
agricultural base, no money to spend on development, a volatile western
frontier and a state divided within itself in multiple ways.

The name Pakistan gives us clues about these divisions; *pak* means
‘pure’ and *stan* means ‘land’ in Urdu, so it is the land of the pure,
but it is also an acronym. The P is for Punjab, A is for Afghania (the
Pashtun area by the Afghan border), K for Kashmir, S for Sindh and T
stands for ‘tan’, as in Baluchistan.

From these five distinct regions, each with their own language, one
state was formed, but not a nation. Pakistan tries hard to create a
sense of unity, but it remains rare for a Punjabi to marry a Baluchi, or
a Sindh to marry a Pashtun. The Punjabis comprise 60 per cent of the
population, the Sindhs 14 per cent, Pashtuns 13.5 per cent and Baluchis
4.5 per cent. Religious tensions are ever present – not only in the
antagonism sometimes shown to the country’s Christian and Hindu
minorities, but also between the majority Sunni and the minority Shia
Muslims. In Pakistan there are several nations within one state.

<span
id="chapter07.html#page_161"></span>![illustration](media/prisoners-of-geography-assets/images/f0161-01.png)

The regions that make up India and Pakistan – many have their own
distinct identities and languages.

The official language is Urdu, which is the mother tongue of the Muslims
of India who fled in 1947, most of who settled in the Punjab. This does
not endear the language to the rest of the country. The Sindh region has
long chafed at what it feels to be Punjabi dominance and many Sindhs
think they are treated as second-class citizens. The Pashtuns of the
North West Frontier have never accepted the rule of outsiders: <span
id="chapter07.html#page_162"></span>parts of the frontier region are
named the Federally Administered Tribal Areas, but in reality they have
never been administered from Islamabad. Kashmir remains divided between
Pakistan and India, and although a majority of Kashmiris want
independence, the one thing India and Pakistan can agree on is that they
cannot have it. Baluchistan also has an independence movement which
periodically rises up against the state.

Baluchistan is of crucial importance: while it may only contain a small
minority of Pakistan’s population, without it there is no Pakistan. It
comprises almost 45 per cent of the country and holds much of its
natural gas and mineral wealth. Another source of income beckons with
the proposed overland routes to bring Iranian and Caspian Sea oil up
through Pakistan to China. The jewel in this particular crown is the
coastal city of Gwadar. Many analysts believe this strategic asset was
the Soviet Union’s long-term target when it invaded Afghanistan in 1979:
Gwadar would have fulfilled Moscow’s long-held dream of a warm-water
port. The Chinese have also been attracted by this jewel and invested
billions of dollars in the region. A deep-water port was inaugurated in
2007 and the two countries are now working to link it to China. In the
long run, China would like to use Pakistan as a land route for its
energy needs. This would allow it to bypass the Strait of Malacca, which
as we saw in the chapter on China is a choke point that could strangle
Chinese economic growth.

In the spring of 2015, the two countries agreed a $46 billion deal to
build a superhighway of roads, railways and pipelines running 1,800
miles from Gwadar to China’s Xinjiang region. The China–Pakistan
Economic Corridor, as it is called, will give China direct access to the
Indian Ocean and beyond.

Massive Chinese investment in building a land route such as this would
make Pakistan very happy, and this is one of the reasons Pakistan will
always seek to crush any secessionist movements that arise in the
province. However, until more of the wealth Baluchistan creates is <span
id="chapter07.html#page_163"></span>returned home and used for its own
development, the area is destined to remain restive and occasionally
violent.

Islam, cricket, the intelligence services, the military and fear of
India are what hold Pakistan together. None of these will be enough to
prevent it from being pulled apart if the forces of separatism grow
stronger. In effect Pakistan has been in a state of civil war for more
than a decade, following periodic and ill-judged wars with its giant
neighbour India.

The first was in 1947, shortly after partition, and was fought over
Kashmir, which in 1948 ended up divided along the Line of Control (also
known as Asia’s Berlin Wall); however, both India and Pakistan continue
to claim sovereignty.

Nearly twenty years later Pakistan miscalculated the strength of the
Indian military because of India’s poor performance in the 1962
India–China war. Tensions between India and China had risen due to the
Chinese invasion of Tibet, which in turn had led India to give refuge to
the Dalai Lama. During this brief conflict the Chinese military showed
their superiority and pushed forward almost into the state of Assam near
the Indian heartland. The Pakistan military watched with glee then,
overestimating their own prowess, went to war with India in 1965 and
lost.

In 1984 Pakistan and India fought skirmishes at an altitude of 22,000
feet on the Siachen Glacier, thought to be the highest battle in
history. More fighting broke out in 1985, 1987 and 1995. Pakistan
continued to train militants to infiltrate across the Line of Control
and another battle broke out over Kashmir in 1999. By then both
countries were armed with nuclear weapons, and for several weeks the
unspoken threat of an escalation to nuclear war hovered over the
conflict before American diplomacy kicked in and the two sides were
talked down. They came close to war again in 2001, and gunfire still
breaks out sporadically along the border.

Militarily, India and Pakistan are pitted against each other. Both sides
say their posture is defensive, but neither believes the other and so
they <span id="chapter07.html#page_164"></span>continue to mass troops
on the border, locked together in a potential dance of death.

The relationship between India and Pakistan will never be friendly, but
were it not for the thorn of Kashmir in both sides it could potentially
be cordial. As it is, India is content to see Pakistan divided within
itself and will work to maintain that situation, and Pakistan will seek
to undermine India, with elements within the state even supporting
terror attacks inside India such as the Mumbai massacre of 2008.

The Kashmir issue is partially one of national pride, but it is also
strategic. Full control of Kashmir would give India a window into
Central Asia and a border with Afghanistan. It would also deny Pakistan
a border with China and thus diminish the usefulness of a
Chinese–Pakistani relationship. The Pakistani government likes to
trumpet that its friendship with China is ‘taller than the mountains and
deeper than the oceans’. This is not true, but it is useful in sometimes
making the Americans nervous about cutting Pakistan off from the massive
financial aid it receives from Washington.

If Pakistan had full control of Kashmir it would strengthen Islamabad’s
foreign policy options and deny India opportunities. It would also help
Pakistan’s water security. The Indus River originates in Himalayan Tibet
but passes through the Indian-controlled part of Kashmir before entering
Pakistan and then running the length of the country and emptying into
the Arabian Sea at Karachi.

The Indus and its tributaries provide water to two-thirds of the
country: without it the cotton industry and many other mainstays of
Pakistan’s struggling economy would collapse. By a treaty that has been
honoured through all of their wars, India and Pakistan agreed to share
the waters; but both populations are growing at an alarming rate, and
global warming could diminish the water flow. Annexing all of Kashmir
would secure Pakistan’s water supply. Given the stakes, neither side
will let go; and until they agree on Kashmir the key to unlocking the
hostility <span id="chapter07.html#page_165"></span>between them cannot
be found. Kashmir looks destined to remain a place where a sporadic
proxy war between Pakistani-trained fighters and the Indian army is
conducted – a conflict which threatens to spill over into full-scale war
with the inherent danger of the use of nuclear weapons. Both countries
will also continue to fight another proxy war – in Afghanistan –
especially now that most NATO forces have left.

Pakistan lacks internal ‘strategic depth’ – somewhere to fall back to in
the event of being overrun from the east – from India. The Pakistan/
Indian border includes swampland in the south, the Thar Desert and the
mountains of the north; all are extremely difficult territory for an
army to cross. It can be done and both sides have battle plans of how to
fight there. The Indian Army plan involves blockading the port of
Karachi and its fuel storage depots by land and sea, but an easier
invasion route is between the south and the north – it lies in the
centre, in the more hospitable Punjab, and in the Punjab is Pakistan’s
capital – Islamabad.

The distance from the Indian border to Islamabad is less than 250 miles,
most of it flat ground. In the event of a massive, overwhelming,
conventional attack the Indian army could be in the capital within a few
days. That they profess no desire to do so is not the point: from
Pakistan’s point of view they might, and the geographical possibility is
enough for Pakistan to require a Plan A and a Plan B to counter the
risk.

Plan A is to halt an Indian advance in the Punjab and possibly
counter-attack across the border and cut the Indian Highway 1A, which is
a vital supply route for the Indian military. The Indian Army is more
than 1 million strong, twice the size of Pakistan’s, but if can’t be
supplied, it can’t fight. Plan B is to fall back across the Afghan
border if required, and that requires a sympathetic government in Kabul.
Hence geography has dictated that Pakistan will involve itself in
Afghanistan, as will India.

To thwart each other, each side seeks to mould the government of
Afghanistan to its liking – or, to put it another way, each side wants
Kabul to be an enemy of its enemy.

<span id="chapter07.html#page_166"></span>When the Soviets invaded
Afghanistan in 1979 India gave diplomatic support to Moscow, but
Pakistan was quick to help the Americans and Saudis to arm, train and
pay for the Mujahedeen to fight the Red Army. Once the Soviets were
beaten Pakistan’s intelligence service, the ISI, helped to create, and
then back, the Afghan Taliban, which duly took over the country.

Pakistan had a natural ‘in’ with the Afghan Taliban. Most are Pashtun,
the same ethnicity as the majority of the Pakistanis of the North West
Frontier (now known as Khyber Pakhtunkhwa). They have never thought of
themselves as two peoples and consider the border between them as a
Western invention, which in some ways it is.

The Afghan–Pakistani border is known as the Durand Line. Sir Mortimer
Durand, the Foreign Secretary of the colonial government of India, drew
it in 1893 and the then ruler of Afghanistan agreed to it. However, in
1949 the Afghan government ‘annulled’ the agreement, believing it to be
an artificial relic of the colonial era. Since then Pakistan has tried
to persuade Afghanistan to change its mind, Afghanistan refuses, and the
Pashtuns each side of the mountains try to carry on as they have for
centuries by ignoring the border and maintaining their ancient
connections.

Central to this area, sometimes called Pashtunistan, is the Pakistani
city of Peshawar, a sort of urban Taliban military-industrial complex.
Knock-off Kalashnikovs, bomb-making technology and fighters flow out
from the city, and support from within sections of the state flows in.

It is also a staging post for ISI officers en route to Afghanistan with
funds and instructions for the Talibanesque groups across the border.
Pakistan has been involved militarily in Afghanistan for decades now,
but it has overreached itself, and the tiger it was riding has bitten
it.

In 2001 the Pakistani-created Taliban had been hosting the foreign
fighters of Al Qaeda for several years. Then, on 9/11, Al Qaeda struck
the USA on its home soil in an operation put together in Afghanistan. In
response US military power ran the Taliban and Al Qaeda out of town.
Afghan Northern Alliance anti-Taliban forces moved down to take over the
country and a NATO stabilisation force followed.

<span
id="chapter07.html#page_167"></span>![illustration](media/prisoners-of-geography-assets/images/f0167-01.png)

The main ethnic groups in the Afghan–Pakistani area did not fit into the
border that was imposed in 1893 by the Durand Line; many of these groups
continue to identify more with their tribes beyond the borders than with
the rest of the nation.

Across the border on the day after 9/11, the Americans had begun
breathing diplomatic fire on the Pakistanis, demanding their
participation in the ‘War on Terror’ and an end to their support for
terrorism. The then Secretary of State, Colin Powell, had phoned
President Musharraf and demanded he come out of a meeting to take the
call, in which he told him: ‘You are either with us or against us.’

It has never been confirmed by the American side, but Musharraf has
written that the call was followed up by Powell’s deputy Richard <span
id="chapter07.html#page_168"></span>Armitage ringing the head of the ISI
and telling him ‘that if we chose the terrorists, then we should be
prepared to be bombed back to the Stone Age’. Pakistan co-operated, and
that was that. Except – they hadn’t fully co-operated, and that wasn’t
that.

Islamabad was forced to act, and did; but not everyone in the Pakistani
system was on board. The government banned several militant groups and
tried to rein in religious groups it deemed extremist. By 2004 it was
involved militarily against groups in the North West Frontier and
privately accepted the American policy of drone strikes on its territory
whilst publically decrying them.

These were tough decisions. The Pakistan military and ISI had to turn on
the very Taliban leaders they had trained and formed friendships with in
the 1990s. The Taliban groups reacted with fury, seizing complete
control of several regions in the tribal areas. Musharraf was the target
of three failed assassination attempts, his would-be successor Benazir
Bhutto was murdered, and amid the chaos of bombing campaigns and
military offensives up to 50,000 Pakistani civilians have been killed.

The American/NATO operation in Afghanistan, and the Pakistani measures
across the border, had helped scatter the Arab, Chechen and other
foreign fighters of Al Qaeda to the corners of the earth, where their
leadership was hunted down and killed; but the Taliban had nowhere to go
– they were Afghans and Pakistanis – and, as they told these new
technologically advanced foreign invaders from America and Europe, ‘You
may have the watches – but we have the time.’ They would wait out the
foreigners no matter what was thrown at them, and in this they would be
helped by elements in Pakistan.

Within a couple of years it became clear: the Taliban had not been
defeated, they had melted into where they came from, the Pashtun
population, and were now emerging again at times and places of their
choosing.

<span id="chapter07.html#page_169"></span>The Americans came up with a
‘hammer and anvil’ strategy. They would hammer the Afghan Taliban
against the anvil of the Pakistani operation on the other side of the
border. The ‘anvil’ in the tribal areas turned out instead to be a
sponge that soaked up whatever was thrown at it, including any Afghan
Taliban retreating from the American hammer.

In 2006 the British decided they would stabilise Helmand Province in the
south, where the Afghan government’s remit did not run far outside of
the provincial capital, Lashkar Gah. This was Afghan Pashtun heartland
territory. The British went in with good intentions, they knew their
history, but it seems they just ignored it – the reason why remains a
mystery. The then British Defence Secretary John Reid is wrongly quoted,
and blamed, for having said that summer that he ‘hoped not a shot will
be fired in anger’. In fact he said, ‘We’re in the south to help and
protect the Afghan people to reconstruct their economy and democracy. We
would be perfectly happy to leave in three years’ time without firing
one shot.’

That may have been a fine aspiration, but was it ever feasible? That
summer, after he gave a briefing at the Foreign Office in London, I had
an exchange with the Defence Secretary, as follows:

‘Don’t worry, Tim. We’re not going after the Taliban, we’re there to
protect people.’

‘Don’t worry, Secretary of State, the Taliban are going to come after
you.’

It was an amicable exchange, conducted before more than 450 British
soldiers had been killed, but to this day I don’t know if the British
government was softening up public opinion ahead of the deployment of
troops whilst privately predicting it would be tough going, or whether
it was being inexplicably naive about what lay ahead.

<span id="chapter07.html#page_170"></span>So the Taliban bled the
British, bled the Americans, bled NATO, waited NATO out, and after
thirteen years NATO went away.

During this whole period members of the highest levels of Pakistan’s
establishment were playing a double game. America might have its
strategy, but Pakistan knew what the Taliban knew: that one day the
Americans would go away, and when they left, Pakistan’s foreign policy
would still require a Pakistan-friendly government in Afghanistan.
Factions within the Pakistan military and government had continued to
give help to the Taliban, gambling that after NATO’s retreat the
southern half of Afghanistan at the very least would revert to Taliban
dominance, thus ensuring that Kabul would need to talk to Islamabad.

Pakistan’s perfidy was laid bare when the Americans eventually found Al
Qaeda’s leader, Osama bin Laden, hiding in plain sight of the government
in Abbottabad, a military garrison town. By that point, such was the
Americans’ lack of trust in their Pakistani ‘allies’ that they failed to
tell Islamabad in advance about the Special Forces team which flew in to
kill bin Laden. This was a breach of sovereignty that humiliated the
military and government of Pakistan, as did the argument which went: ‘If
you didn’t know he was there you were incompetent; if you did you were
complicit.’

The Pakistani government had always denied playing the double game that
resulted in the deaths of huge numbers of Afghans and Pakistanis, as
well as relatively small numbers of Americans. After the Abbottabad
mission Islamabad continued the denials, but now there were fewer people
who believed them. If elements of the Pakistani establishment were
prepared to give succour to America’s most wanted man, even though he
was by then of limited value to them, it was obvious they would support
groups which furthered their ambitions to influence events in
Afghanistan. The problem was that those groups now had their
counterparts in Pakistan and they wanted to influence events there. The
biter was bitten.

<span id="chapter07.html#page_171"></span>The Pakistani Taliban is a
natural outgrowth of the Afghan version. Both are predominantly Pashtun
and neither will accept domination from any non-Pashtun power, be it the
British army of the nineteenth century or the Punjabi-dominated
Pakistani army of the twenty-first century.

This was always understood and accepted by Islamabad. The Pakistani
government pretended it ruled the entire country, and the Pashtun of the
North West Frontier pretended they were loyal to the Pakistani state.
This relationship worked until 11 September 2001.

The years since then have been exceptionally hard on Pakistan. The
civilian death toll is enormous and foreign investment has dwindled
away, making ordinary life even harder. The army, forced to go up
against what was a de facto ally, has lost up to 5,000 men and the civil
war has endangered the fragile unity of the state.

By the spring of 2015 things had become even tougher. NATO had left
Afghanistan and the Americans had announced an end to combat missions,
leaving behind only a residual force. Officially this is to conduct
Special Forces operations and training missions; unofficially it is to
try to ensure that Kabul does not fall to the Taliban. Without NATO
harrying the Taliban on the Afghan side of the border, Pakistan’s job of
beating the Pakistani Taliban has become even harder. Washington
continues to press Islamabad, and this leaves several possible
scenarios:

•   The full weight of the Pakistani military falls upon the North West
Frontier and defeats the Taliban.

•   The Taliban campaign continues to hasten the fracturing of Pakistan
until it becomes a failed state.

•   The Americans lose interest, the pressure on Islamabad relents and
the government compromises with the Taliban. The situation returns to
normal, with the North West Frontier left alone but Pakistan continuing
to push its agenda in Afghanistan.

<span id="chapter07.html#page_172"></span>Of these scenarios, the least
likely is the first. No foreign force has ever defeated the tribes of
the North West Frontier, and a Pakistani army containing Punjabis,
Sindhis, Baluchis and Kashmiris (and some Pashtun) is considered a
foreign force once it moves into the tribal areas.

Scenario two is possible but, after being deaf to years of wake-up
calls, the Taliban’s 2014 massacre of 132 schoolchildren in Peshawar
does seem to have jolted enough of the Pakistani establishment to make
it realise that the movement it helped to create might now destroy it.

This makes scenario three the most likely. The Americans have limited
interest in Afghanistan so long as the Taliban quietly promise not to
host an international jihadist group again. The Pakistanis will maintain
enough links with the Afghan Talibs to ensure that governments in Kabul
will listen to Islamabad and not cosy up to India, and once the pressure
is off they can do a deal with the Pakistani Taliban.

None of this would have been necessary if the Afghan Taliban, in part
created by the Pakistani ISI, had not been stupid enough to host the
Arabs of bin Laden’s Al Qaeda and then after 9/11 had not fallen back
upon the Pashtun culture of honouring guests, thus refusing to give them
up when the Americans came calling.

As for India, it can multi-task – indeed it has to, given that it has
more to think about than only Pakistan, even if it is the number one
foreign policy priority for New Delhi. Having a hostile nuclear-armed
state next door is bound to focus the mind, but India also has to
concentrate on managing 1.3 billion people whilst simultaneously
emerging as a potential world power.

Its relationship with China would dominate its foreign policy, but for
one thing – the Himalayas. Without the world’s tallest mountain range
between them, what is a lukewarm relationship would probably be frosty.
A glance at the map indicates two huge countries cheek by jowl, but a
closer look shows they are walled off from one another along what the
CIA *World Factbook* lists as 1,652 miles of border.

<span id="chapter07.html#page_173"></span>There are issues which cause
friction, chief among them Tibet, the highest region on earth. As
previously discussed, China wanted Tibet, both to prevent India from
having it, and – almost as bad in Beijing’s view – to prevent an
independent Tibet allowing India to base military forces there, thus
giving them the commanding heights.

India’s response to the Chinese annexation of Tibet was to give a home
to the Dalai Lama and the Tibetan independence movement in Dharamshala
in the state of Himachal Pradesh. This is a long-term insurance policy,
paid for by India but without the expectation that it will ever be
cashed in. As things stand Tibetan independence looks impossible; but if
the impossible were to occur, even in several decades’ time, India would
be in a position to remind a Tibetan government who their friends were
during the years of exile.

The Chinese understand that this scenario is extremely unlikely, but
remain irritated by Dharamshala. Their response is seen in Nepal, where
Beijing ensures it has influence with the Maoist movement there.

India does not want to see a Maoist-dominated Nepal ultimately
controlled by China, but knows that Beijing’s money and trade is buying
influence there. China may care little for Maoism these days, but it
cares enough about Tibet to signal to India that it too can afford the
payments on a long-term insurance policy. Any ‘interference’ in Tibet
can be met with ‘interference’ in Nepal. The more India has to
concentrate on the smaller states in its neighbourhood, the less it can
concentrate on China.

Another issue between them is the north-eastern Indian state of
Arunachal Pradesh, which China claims as ‘South Tibet’. As China’s
confidence grows, so does the amount of territory there it says is
Chinese. Until recently China only claimed the Tawang area in the
extreme west of the state. However, in the early 2000s Beijing decided
that all of Arunachal Pradesh was Chinese, which was news to the Indians
who have exercised sovereignty over it since 1955. The Chinese claim is
partly geographical and partly psychological. Arunachal <span
id="chapter07.html#page_174"></span>Pradesh borders China, Bhutan and
Burma, making it strategically useful, but the issue is also valuable to
China as a reminder to Tibet that independence is a non-starter.

That is a message India also has to send periodically to several of its
own regions. There are numerous separatist movements, some more active
than others, some dormant, but none that look set to achieve their aims.
For example, the Sikh movement to create a state for Sikhs out of part
of both Indian and Pakistani Punjab has for the moment gone quiet, but
could flare up again. The state of Assam has several competing
movements, including the Bodo-speaking peoples, who want a state for
themselves, and the Muslim United Liberation Tigers of Assam, who want a
separate country created within Assam for Muslims.

There is even a movement to create an independent Christian state in
Nagaland, where 75 per cent of the population are Baptist; however, the
prospect of the Nagaland National Council achieving its aims is as
remote as the land it seeks to control, and that looks to be true of all
of the separatist movements.

Despite these, and other, groups seeking independence, a Sikh population
of 21 million people and a Muslim minority of perhaps 170 million, India
retains a strong sense of itself and unity within diversity. This will
help as it emerges further onto the world stage.

The world has so marvelled at China’s stunning rise to power that its
neighbour is often overlooked, but India may yet rival China as an
economic powerhouse this century. It is the world’s seventh-largest
country, with the second-largest population. It has borders with six
countries (seven if you include Afghanistan). It has 9,000 miles of
internal navigable waterways, reliable water supplies and huge areas of
arable land, is a major coal producer and has useful quantities of oil
and gas, even if it will always be an importer of all three, and its
subsidisation of fuel and heating costs is a drain on its finances.

Despite its natural riches India has not matched China’s growth, and
<span id="chapter07.html#page_175"></span>because China is now moving
out into the world, the two countries may bump up against each other –
not along their land border, but at sea.

For thousands of years the regions of what are now modern-day China and
India could ignore each other because of their terrain. Expansion into
each other’s territory through the Himalayas was impossible, and
besides, each had more than enough arable land.

Now, though, the rise of technology means each requires vast amounts of
energy; geography has not bequeathed them such riches, and so both
countries have been forced to expand their horizons and venture out into
the oceans, and it is there that they have encountered one another.

Twenty-five years ago India embarked on a ‘look east’ policy, partially
as a block to what it could see would be the imminent rise of China. It
has ‘taken care of business’ by dramatically increasing trade with China
(mostly imports) while simultaneously forging strategic relationships in
what China regards as its own backyard.

India has strengthened its ties with Burma, the Philippines, and
Thailand, but more importantly it is working with Vietnam and Japan to
check China’s increasing domination of the South China Sea.

In this it has a new ally, albeit one it keeps at arm’s length – the
United States. For decades India was suspicious that the Americans were
the new British, but with a different accent and more money. In the
twenty-first century a more confident India, in an increasingly
multipolar world, has found reason to co-operate with the USA. When
President Obama attended the 2015 Indian Republic Day military parade,
New Delhi took care to show off its shiny new US-supplied C-130 Hercules
and C-17 Globemaster transport aircraft as well as its Russian-supplied
tanks. The two giant democracies are slowly moving closer together.

India has a large, well-equipped modern navy which includes an aircraft
carrier, but it will not be able to compete with the massive Blue Water
navy which China is planning. Instead India is aligning itself <span
id="chapter07.html#page_176"></span>with other interested parties so
they can together at least shadow, if not dominate, the Chinese navy as
it sails the China seas, through the Strait of Malacca, past the Bay of
Bengal and around the tip of India into the Arabian Sea towards the
friendly port China has built at Gwadar in Pakistan.

With India, it always comes back to Pakistan, and with Pakistan, to
India.

<span id="chapter08.html"></span>

<span id="chapter08.html#page_177"></span>CHAPTER 8 []
---------------------------------------------------

**KOREA AND JAPAN** []
-------------------

 

*‘I . . . began to phrase a little pun about Kim Jong-il being the “Oh
Dear Leader”, but it died on my lips.’*  
Christopher Hitchens, *Love, Poverty  
and War: Journeys and Essays*

<span id="chapter08.html#page_178"></span><span
id="chapter08.html#page_179"></span>![illustration](media/prisoners-of-geography-assets/images/f0178-01.png)

 

<span id="chapter08.html#page_180"></span><span
class="big">H</span><small>OW DO YOU SOLVE A PROBLEM LIKE KOREA? YOU
DON’T, YOU</small> just manage it – after all, there’s a lot of other
stuff going on around the world which needs immediate attention.

The whole of the region from Malaysia up to the Russian port of
Vladivostok eyes the North/South Korea problem nervously. All the
neighbours know it has the potential to blow up in their faces, dragging
in other countries and damaging their economies. The Chinese don’t want
to fight on behalf of North Korea, but nor do they want a united Korea
containing American bases close to their border. The Americans don’t
really want to fight for the South Koreans, but nor can they afford to
be seen to be giving up on a friend. The Japanese, with their long
history of involvement in the Korean Peninsula, must be seen to tread
lightly, knowing that whatever happens will probably involve them.

The solution is compromise, but there is limited appetite for that in
South Korea, and none at all displayed by the leadership of the North.
The way forward is not at all clear; it seems as if it is always just
out of sight over the horizon.

For several years the USA and Cuba have danced quietly around each
other, dropping hints that they would like to tango without tangling,
leading to the breakthrough in re-establishing diplomatic relations in
July 2015. North Korea, on the other hand, glares at any requests from
would-be suitors to take the floor, occasionally pulling faces.

North Korea is a poverty-stricken country of an estimated 25 million
people, led by a basket case of a morally corrupt, bankrupt Communist
monarchy, and supported by China, partly out of a fear of millions of
<span id="chapter08.html#page_181"></span>refugees flooding north across
the Yalu River. The USA, anxious that a military withdrawal would send
out the wrong signal and embolden North Korean adventurism, continues to
station almost 30,000 troops in South Korea, and the South, with mixed
feelings about risking its prosperity, continues to do little to advance
reunification.

All the actors in this East Asian drama know that if they try to force
an answer to the question at the wrong time, they risk making things
worse. A lot worse. It is not unreasonable to fear that you would end up
with two capital cities in smoking ruins, a civil war, a humanitarian
catastrophe, missiles landing in and around Tokyo and another Chinese/
American military face-off on a divided peninsula in which one side has
nuclear weapons. If North Korea implodes, it might well also explode,
projecting instability across the borders in the form of war, terrorism
and/or a flood of refugees, and so the actors are stuck. And so the
solution is left to the next generation of leaders, and then the next
one.

If world leaders even speak openly about preparing for the day when
North Korea collapses, they risk hastening that day; and as no one has
planned for it – best keep quiet. Catch-22.

North Korea continues to play the crazed, powerful weakling to good
effect. Its foreign policy consists, essentially, of being suspicious of
everyone except the Chinese, and even Beijing is not to be fully trusted
despite supplying 84.12 per cent of North Korea’s imports and buying
84.48 per cent of its exports, according to 2014 figures by the
Observatory of Economic Complexity. North Korea puts a lot of effort
into playing all outsiders off against each other, including the
Chinese, in order to block a united front against it.

To its captive population it says it is a strong, munificent,
magnificent state standing up against all the odds and against the evil
foreigners, calling itself the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
(DPRK). It has a unique political philosophy of *‘Juche’*, which blends
fierce nationalism with Communism and national self-reliance.

<span id="chapter08.html#page_182"></span>In reality, it is the least
democratic state in the world: it is not run for the people and it is
not a republic. It is a dynasty shared by one family and one party. It
also ticks every box in the dictatorship test: arbitrary arrest,
torture, show trials, internment camps, censorship, rule of fear,
corruption and a litany of horrors on a scale without parallel in the
twenty-first century. Satellite images and witness testimony suggest
that at least 150,000 political prisoners are held in giant work and
‘re-education’ camps. North Korea is a stain on the world’s conscience,
and yet few people know the full scale of the horrors taking place
there.

Such is the self-imposed isolation of the country, and the state’s
almost total control of knowledge, that we can only guess at what the
people may feel about their country, system and leaders and whether they
support the regime. Analysing what is going on politically, and why, is
akin to looking through an opaque window whilst wearing sunglasses. A
former ambassador to Pyongyang once told me: ‘It’s like you are on one
side of the glass, and you try to prise it open, but there’s nothing to
get a grip on to peer inside.’

The founding story of Korea is that it was created in 2333
<small>BCE</small> by heavenly design. The Lord of Heaven sent his son
Hwanung down to earth, where he descended to the Paektu (Baekdu)
Mountain and married a woman who used to be a bear, and their son Dangun
went on to engage in an early example of nation-building.

The earliest recorded version of this creation legend dates from the
thirteenth century. It may in some ways explain why a Communist state
has a leadership that is passed down through one family and given divine
status. For example, Kim Jong-il was described by the Pyongyang
propaganda machine as ‘Dear Leader, who is a perfect incarnation of the
appearance that a leader should have’, ‘Guiding Sun Ray’, ‘Shining Star
of Paektu Mountain’, ‘World Leader of the twenty-first century’ and
‘Great Man who descended from heaven’, as well as ‘Eternal Bosom of Hot
Love’. His father had very similar titles, as does his son.

<span id="chapter08.html#page_183"></span>How does the general
population feel about such statements? Even the experts are left
guessing. When you look at footage of the mass hysteria of North Koreans
mourning Kim Jong-il, who died in 2011, it’s interesting to note that
after the first few rows of sobbing, shrieking people the level of grief
appears to diminish. Is this because those at the front know the camera
is on them and thus for their own safety they must do what is required?
Or have the Party faithful been put at the front? Or are they ordinary
people who are genuinely grief-stricken, a North Korean magnification of
the sort of emotional outbursts we saw in the UK after the death of
Princess Diana?

Nevertheless, the DPRK is still pulling off the crazy-dangerous,
weak-dangerous act. It’s quite a trick, and its roots lie partially in
Korea’s location and history, trapped as it is between the giants of
China and Japan.

The name ‘The Hermit Kingdom’ was earned by Korea in the eighteenth
century after it attempted to isolate itself following centuries of
being a target for domination, occupation and plunder, or occasionally
simply a route on the way to somewhere else. If you come from the north,
then once you are over the Yalu River there are few major natural
defensive lines all the way down to the sea, and if you can land from
the sea the reverse is true. The Mongols came and went, as did the
Chinese Ming dynasty, the Manchurians and the Japanese several times. So
for a while the country preferred not to engage with the outside world,
cutting many of its trade links in the hope that it would be left alone.

It was not successful. In the twentieth century the Japanese were back,
annexing the whole country in 1910, and later set about destroying its
culture. The Korean language was banned, as was the teaching of Korean
history, and worship at Shinto shrines became compulsory. The decades of
repression have left a legacy which even today impacts on relations
between Japan and both the Korean states.

The defeat of Japan in 1945 left Korea divided along the 38th parallel.
<span id="chapter08.html#page_184"></span>North of it was a Communist
regime overseen first by the Soviets and later by Communist China, south
of the line was a pro-American dictatorship called the Republic of Korea
(ROK). This was the very beginning of the Cold War era when every inch
of land was contested, with each side looking to establish influence or
control around the world, unwilling to let the other maintain a sole
presence.

The choice of the 38th parallel as the line of division was unfortunate
in many ways and, according to the American historian Don Oberdorfer,
arbitrary. He says that Washington was so focused on the Japanese
surrender on 10 August 1945 that it had no real strategy for Korea. With
Soviet troops on the move in the north of the peninsula and the White
House convening an all-night emergency meeting, two junior officers,
armed only with a *National Geographic* map, chose the 38th parallel as
a place to suggest to the Soviets they halt, on the grounds that it was
halfway down the country. One of those officers was Dean Rusk, who would
go on to be Secretary of State under President Truman during the Korean
War.

No Koreans were present, nor any Korea experts. If they had been they
could have told President Truman and his then Secretary of State James
Francis Byrnes that the line was the same one as the Russians and
Japanese had discussed for spheres of influence half a century earlier,
following the Russo–Japanese War of 1904–5. Moscow, not knowing that the
Americans were making up policy on the hoof, could be forgiven for
thinking this was the USA’s de facto recognition of that suggestion and
therefore acceptance of division and a Communist north. The deal was
done, the nation divided and the die cast.

The Soviets pulled their troops out of the north in 1948 and the
Americans followed suit in the south in 1949. In June 1950, an
emboldened North Korean military fatally underestimated America’s Cold
War geopolitical strategy and crossed the 38th parallel, intent on
reuniting the peninsula under one Communist government. The Northern
forces raced down the country almost to the tip of the southern coast,
sounding the alarm bells in Washington.

<span id="chapter08.html#page_185"></span>The North Korean leadership,
and its Chinese backers, had correctly worked out that, in a strictly
military sense, Korea was not vital to the USA; but what they failed to
understand was that the Americans knew that if they didn’t stand up for
their South Korean ally, their other allies around the world would lose
confidence in them. If America’s allies, at the height of the Cold War,
began to hedge their bets or go over to the Communist side, then its
entire global strategy would be in trouble. There are parallels here
with the USA’s policy in modern East Asia and Eastern Europe. Countries
such as Poland, the Baltic States, Japan and the Philippines need to be
confident that America has their back when it comes to their relations
with Russia and China.

In September 1950 the USA, leading a United Nations force, surged into
Korea, pushing the Northern troops back across the 38th parallel and
then up almost to the Yalu River and the border with China.

Now it was Beijing’s turn to make a decision. It was one thing to have
US forces on the peninsula, quite another when they were north of the
parallel – indeed north of the mountains above Hamhung – and within
striking distance of China itself. Chinese troops poured across the Yalu
and thirty-six months of fierce fighting ensued with massive casualties
on all sides before they ground to a halt along the current border and
agreed a truce, but not a treaty. There they were, stuck on the 38th
parallel, and stuck they remain.

The geography of the peninsula is fairly uncomplicated and a reminder of
how artificial the division is between North and South. The real
(broad-brush) split is west to east. The west of the peninsula is much
flatter than the east and is where the majority of people live. The east
has the Hamgyong mountain range in the north and lower ranges in the
south. The demilitarised zone (DMZ), which cuts the peninsula in half,
in parts follows the path of the Imjin-gang River, but this was never a
natural barrier between two entities, just a river within a unified
geographical space all too frequently entered by foreigners.

<span id="chapter08.html#page_186"></span>The two Koreas are still
technically at war, and given the hair-trigger tensions between them a
major conflict is never more than a few artillery rounds away.

Japan, the USA and South Korea all worry about North Korea’s nuclear
weapons, but South Korea in particular has another threat hanging over
it. North Korea’s ability to successfully miniaturise its nuclear
technology and create warheads that could be launched is uncertain, but
it is definitely capable, as it already showed in 1950, of a surprise,
first-strike, conventional attack.

South Korea’s capital, the mega-city of Seoul, lies just 35 miles south
of the 38th parallel and the DMZ. Almost half of South Korea’s 50
million people live in the greater Seoul region, which is home to much
of its industry and financial centres, and it is all within range of
North Korean artillery.

![illustration](media/prisoners-of-geography-assets/images/f0186-01.png)

A major concern for South Korea is how close Seoul and the surrounding
urban areas are to the border with North Korea. Seoul’s position makes
it vulnerable to surprise attacks from its neighbour, whose capital is
much further away and partially protected by mountainous terrain.

<span id="chapter08.html#page_187"></span>In the hills above the
148-mile-long DMZ the North Korean military has an estimated 10,000
artillery pieces. They are well dug in, some in fortified bunkers and
caves. Not all of them could reach the centre of Seoul, but some could,
and all are able to reach the greater Seoul region. There’s little doubt
that within two or three days the combined might of the South Korean and
US air forces would have destroyed many of them, but by that time Seoul
would be in flames. Imagine the effect of just one salvo of shells from
10,000 artillery weapons landing in urban and semi-urban areas, then
multiply it dozens of times.

Two experts on North Korea, Victor Cha and David Chang, writing for
*Foreign Policy* magazine, estimated that the DPRK forces could fire up
to 500,000 rounds towards the city in the first hour of a conflict. That
seems a very high estimate, but even if you divide it by five the
results would still be devastating. The South Korean government would
find itself fighting a major war whilst simultaneously trying to manage
the chaos of millions of people fleeing south even as it tried to
reinforce the border with troops stationed below the capital.

The hills above the DMZ are not high and there is a lot of flat ground
between them and Seoul. In a surprise attack the North Korean army could
push forward quite quickly, aided by Special Forces who would enter via
underground tunnels which the South Koreans believe have already been
built. North Korea’s battle plans are thought to include submarines
landing shock troops south of Seoul, and the activation of sleeper cells
placed in the South’s population. It is estimated to have 100,000
personnel it regards as Special Forces.

The North has also already proved it can reach Tokyo with ballistic
missiles by firing several of them over the Sea of Japan and into the
Pacific, a route which takes them directly over Japanese territory. Its
armed forces are more than a million strong, one of the biggest armies
<span id="chapter08.html#page_188"></span>in the world, and even if
large numbers of them are not highly trained they would be useful to
Pyongyang as cannon fodder while it sought to widen the conflict.

The Americans would be fighting alongside the South, the Chinese
military would be on full alert and approaching the Yalu, and the
Russians and Japanese would be looking on nervously.

It is not in anyone’s interest for there to be another major war in
Korea, as both sides would be devastated, but that has not prevented
wars in the past. In 1950, when North Korea crossed the 38th parallel,
it had not foreseen a three-year war with up to four million deaths,
ending in stalemate. A full-scale conflict now might be even more
catastrophic. The ROK’s economy is eighty times stronger than the
North’s, its population is twice the size and the combined South Korean
and US armed forces would almost certainly overwhelm North Korea
eventually, assuming China did not decide to join in again.

And then what? There has been limited serious planning for such an
eventuality. The South is thought to have done some computer modelling
on what might be required, but it is generally accepted that the
situation would be chaotic. The problems that would be created by Korea
imploding or exploding would be multiplied if it happened as a result of
warfare. Many countries would be affected and they would have decisions
to make. Even if China did not want to intervene during the fighting, it
might decide it had to cross the border and secure the North to retain
the buffer zone between it and the US forces. It might decide that a
unified Korea, allied to the USA, which is allied to Japan, would be too
much of a potential threat to allow.

The USA would have to decide how far across the DMZ it would push and
whether it should seek to secure all of North Korea’s sites containing
nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction material. China would have
similar concerns, especially as some of the nuclear facilities are only
35 miles from its border.

<span id="chapter08.html#page_189"></span>On the political front Japan
would have to decide if it wanted a powerful, united Korea across the
Sea of Japan. Given the brittle relations between Tokyo and Seoul, Japan
has reasons to be nervous about such a thing, but as it has far greater
concerns about China it would be likely to come down on the side of
supporting reunification, despite the probable scenario that it would be
asked to assist financially due to its long occupation of the peninsula
in the last century. Besides, it knows what Seoul knows: most of the
economic costs of reunification will be borne by South Korea, and they
will dwarf those of German reunification. East Germany may have been
lagging far behind West Germany, but it had a history of development, an
industrial base and an educated population. Developing the north of
Korea would be building from ground zero and the costs would hold back
the economy of a united peninsula for a decade. After that the benefits
of the rich natural resources of the north, such as coal, zinc, copper,
iron and rare earth elements, and the modernisation programme would be
expected to kick in, but there are mixed feelings about risking the
prosperity of one of the world’s most advanced nations in the meantime.

Those decisions are for the future. For now each side continues to
prepare for a war; as with Pakistan and India, they are locked in a
mutual embrace of fear and suspicion.

South Korea is now a vibrant, integrated member of the nations of the
world, with a foreign policy to match. With open water to its west, east
and south, and with few natural resources, it has taken care to build a
modern navy in the past three decades, one which is capable of getting
out into the Sea of Japan and the East China Sea to safeguard the ROK’s
interests. Like Japan it is dependent on foreign sources for its energy
needs, and so keeps a close eye on the sea lanes of the whole region. It
has spent time hedging its bets, investing diplomatic capital in closer
relations with Russia and China, much to Pyongyang’s annoyance.

A miscalculation by either side could lead to a war which, as well as
<span id="chapter08.html#page_190"></span>having devastating effects on
the people of the peninsula, could wreck the economies of the region,
with massive knock-on effects for the US economy. What started with the
USA defending its Cold War stance against Russia has developed into an
issue of strategic importance to its economy and that of several other
countries.

South Korea still has issues with Tokyo relating back to the Japanese
occupation, and even when it is at its best, which is rare, the
relationship is only cordial. In early 2015 when the Americans, South
Koreans and Japanese got down to the detail of an agreement to share
military intelligence they had each gathered on North Korea, Seoul said
it would pass only a limited amount of secret information to Tokyo via
Washington. It will not deal directly with the Japanese.

The two countries still have a territorial dispute over what South Korea
calls the Dokdo (solitary) Islands and the Japanese know as the
Takeshima (bamboo) islands. The South Koreans currently control the
rocky outcrops, which are in good fishing grounds, and there may be gas
reserves in the region. Despite this thorn in their sides, and the
still-fresh memories of occupation, both have reasons to co-operate and
leave behind their troubled past.

Japan’s history is very different to that of Korea, and the reason for
this is partly due to its geography.

The Japanese are an island race, with the majority of the 127 million
population living mostly on the four large islands that face Korea and
Russia across the Sea of Japan, and a minority inhabiting some of the
6,848 smaller islands. The largest of the main islands is Honshu, which
includes the biggest mega-city in the world, Tokyo, and its 39 million
people.

At its closest point Japan is 120 miles from the Eurasian land mass,
which is among the reasons why it has never been successfully invaded.
The Chinese are some 500 miles away across the East China Sea; and
although there is Russian territory much nearer, the Russian forces are
<span id="chapter08.html#page_191"></span>usually far away because of
the extremely inhospitable climate and sparse population located across
the Sea of Okhotsk.

In the 1300s the Mongols tried to invade Japan after sweeping through
China, Manchuria and down through Korea. On the first occasion they were
beaten back and on the second a storm wrecked their fleet. The seas in
the Korean Strait were whipped up by what the Japanese said was a
‘Divine Wind’ which they called a *‘kamikaze’*.

So the threat from the west and north-west was limited, and to the
south-east and east there was nothing but the Pacific. This last
perspective is why the Japanese gave themselves the name ‘Nippon’ or
‘sun origin’: looking east there was nothing between them and the
horizon, and each morning, rising on that horizon, was the sun. Apart
from sporadic invasions of Korea they mostly kept themselves to
themselves until the modern world arrived, and when it did, after first
pushing it away, they went out to meet it.

Opinions differ about when the islands became Japan, but there is a
famous letter sent from what we know as Japan to the Emperor of China in
617 <small>CE</small> in which a Japanese leading nobleman writes: ‘Here
I the emperor of the country where the sun rises send a letter to the
emperor of the country where the sun sets. Are you healthy?’ History
records that the Chinese Emperor took a dim view of such perceived
impertinence. His empire was vast, while the main Japanese islands were
still only loosely united, a situation which would not change until
approximately the sixteenth century.

The territory of the Japanese islands makes up a country which is bigger
than the two Koreas combined, or in European terms bigger than Germany.
However, three-quarters of the land is not conducive to human
habitation, especially in the mountainous regions, and only 13 per cent
is suitable for intensive cultivation. This leaves the Japanese living
in close proximity to each other along the coastal plains and in
restricted inland areas, where some stepped rice fields can exist in the
hills. Its mountains <span id="chapter08.html#page_192"></span>mean that
Japan has plenty of water, but the lack of flatland also means that its
rivers are unsuited to navigation and therefore trade, a problem
exacerbated by the fact that few of the rivers join each other.

So the Japanese became a maritime people, connecting and trading along
the coasts of their myriad islands, making forays into Korea, and then
after centuries of isolation pushing out to dominate the whole region.

By the beginning of the twentieth century Japan was an industrial power
with the third-largest navy in the world, and in 1905 it defeated the
Russians in a war fought on land and at sea. However, the very same
island-nation geography that had allowed it to remain isolated was now
giving it no choice but to engage with the world. The problem was that
it chose to engage militarily.

Both the First Sino-Japanese War and the Russo-Japanese War were fought
to thwart Chinese and Russian influence in Korea. Japan considered Korea
to be, in the words of its Prussian military advisor, Major Klemens
Meckel, ‘A dagger pointed at the heart of Japan’. Controlling the
peninsula removed the threat, and controlling Manchuria made sure the
hand of China, and to a lesser extent Russia, could not get near the
dagger’s handle. Korea’s coal and iron ore would also come in handy.

Japan had few of the natural resources required to become an
industrialised nation. It had limited and poor-quality supplies of coal,
very little oil, scant quantities of natural gas, limited supplies of
rubber and a shortage of many metals. This is as true now as it was 100
years ago, although offshore gas fields are being explored along with
undersea deposits of precious metals. Nevertheless it remains the
world’s largest importer of natural gas, and third-largest importer of
oil.

It was the thirst for these products that caused Japan to rampage across
China in the 1930s and then South-East Asia in the early 1940s. It had
already occupied Taiwan in 1895 and followed this up with the annexation
of Korea in 1910. Japan occupied Manchuria in 1932, then conducted a
full-scale invasion of China in 1937. As each domino fell, the <span
id="chapter08.html#page_193"></span>expanding empire and the growing
Japanese population required more oil, more coal, more metal, more
rubber and more food.

With the European powers preoccupied with war in Europe, Japan went on
to invade northern Indo-China. Eventually the Americans, who by then
were supplying most of Japan’s oil needs, gave them an ultimatum –
withdrawal or an oil embargo. The Japanese responded with the attack on
Pearl Harbor and then swept on across South-East Asia, taking Burma,
Singapore and the Philippines, among other territory.

This was a massive overstretch, not just taking on the USA, but grabbing
the very resources, rubber for example, which the USA required for its
own industry. The giant of the twentieth century mobilised for total
war. Japan’s geography then played a role in its greatest catastrophe –
Hiroshima and Nagasaki.

The Americans had fought their way across the Pacific, island to island,
at great cost. By the time they took Okinawa, which sits in the Ryukyu
Island chain between Taiwan and Japan, they were faced with a
still-fanatical enemy prepared to defend the approaches and four main
islands from amphibious invasion. Massive US losses were predicted. If
the terrain had been easier the American choice may have been different
– they might have fought their way to Tokyo – but they chose the nuclear
option, unleashing upon Japan, and the collective conscience of the
world, the terror of a new age.

After the radioactive dust had settled on a complete Japanese surrender,
the Americans helped them rebuild, partially as a hedge against
Communist China. The new Japan showed its old inventiveness and within
three decades became a global economic powerhouse.

However, its previous belligerence and militarism were not entirely
gone: they had just been buried beneath the rubble of Hiroshima and
Nagasaki and a shattered national psyche. Japan’s post-war constitution
did not allow for it to have an army, air force or navy, only
‘Self-Defence Forces’ which for decades were a pale shadow of the
pre-war military. <span id="chapter08.html#page_194"></span>The post-war
agreement imposed by the USA limited Japan’s defence spend to 1 per cent
of GDP and left tens of thousands of American forces on Japanese
territory, 32,000 of whom are still there.

But by the early 1980s the faint stirrings of nationalism could again be
detected. There were sections of the older generation who had never
accepted the enormity of Japan’s war crimes, and sections of the younger
who were not prepared to accept guilt for the sins of their fathers.
Many of the children of the Land of the Rising Sun wanted their
‘natural’ place under the sun of the post-war world.

A flexible view of the constitution became the norm, and slowly the
Japanese Self-Defence Forces were turned into a modern fighting unit.
This happened as the rise of China was becoming increasingly apparent
and so the Americans, realising they were going to need military allies
in the Pacific region, were prepared to accept a re-militarised Japan.

In the present century Japan has altered its defence policy to allow its
forces to fight alongside allies abroad, and changes to the constitution
are expected to follow to put this on a more solid legal footing. Its
2013 Security Strategy document was the first in which it named a
potential enemy, saying: ‘China has taken actions that can be regarded
as attempts to change the status quo by coercion.’

The 2015 defence budget was its biggest to date at US$42 billion, mostly
going on naval and air equipment, including six US-made F-35A stealth
fighters. In the spring of 2015 Tokyo also unveiled what it called a
‘helicopter-carrying destroyer’. It didn’t take a military expert to
notice that the vessel was as big as the Japanese aircraft carriers of
the Second World War, which are forbidden by the surrender terms of
1945. The ship can be adapted for fixed-wing aircraft but the defence
minister issued a statement saying that he was ‘not thinking of using it
as an aircraft carrier’. This is akin to buying a motorbike then saying
that because you were not going to use it as a motorbike, it is a
pushbike. The Japanese now have an aircraft carrier.

<span id="chapter08.html#page_195"></span>The money spent on that and
other shiny new kit is a clear statement of intent, as is much of its
positioning. The military infrastructure at Okinawa, which guards the
approaches to the main islands, will be upgraded. This will also allow
Japan greater flexibility to patrol its Air Defence Zone, part of which
overlaps with China’s equivalent zone after an expansion was announced
by Beijing in 2013.

Both zones cover the islands called the Senkaku or Diaoyu (in Japanese
and Chinese respectively), which Japan controls but which are claimed by
China too. They also form part of the Ryukyu Island chain, which is
particularly sensitive as any hostile power must pass the islands on the
way to the Japanese heartlands; they give Japan a lot of territorial sea
space and they might contain exploitable underwater gas and oil fields.
Thus Tokyo intends to hold on to them by all means necessary.

China’s expanded ‘Air Defence Identification Zone’ in the East China Sea
covers territory claimed by China, Japan, Taiwan and South Korea. When
Beijing said that any plane flying through the zone must identity itself
or ‘face defensive measures’, Japan, South Korea and the United States
responded by flying through it without doing so. There was no hostile
response from China, but this is an issue that can be turned into an
ultimatum at a time of Beijing’s choosing.

Japan also claims sovereignty over the Kuril Islands in its far north,
off Hokkaido, which it lost to the Soviet Union in the Second World War
and which are still under Russian control. Russia prefers not to discuss
the matter, but the debate is not in the same league as Japan’s disputes
with China. There are only approximately 19,000 inhabitants of the Kuril
Islands, and although the islands sit in fertile fishing grounds, the
territory is not one of particular strategic importance. The issue
ensures that Russia and Japan maintain a frosty relationship, but within
that frost they have pretty much frozen the question of the islands.

It is China that keeps Japanese leaders awake at night and keeps them
close to the USA, diplomatically and militarily. Many Japanese,
especially <span id="chapter08.html#page_196"></span>on Okinawa, resent
the US military presence, but the might of China, added to the decline
in the Japanese population, is likely to ensure that the post-war
USA–Japan relationship continues, albeit on a more equal basis. Japanese
statisticians fear that the population will shrink to under 100 million
by the middle of the century. China’s enormous population being 1.3
billion people, Japan will need friends in the neighbourhood.

So the Americans are staying in both Korea and Japan. There is now a
triangular relationship between them, as underlined by the intelligence
agreement noted above. Japan and South Korea have plenty to argue about,
but will agree that their shared anxiety about China and North Korea
will overcome this.

Even if they do go on to solve a problem like Korea, the issue of China
will still be there, and this means the US 7th Fleet will remain in the
Bay of Tokyo and US Marines will remain in Okinawa, guarding the paths
in and out of the Pacific and the China Seas. The waters can be expected
to be rough.

<span id="chapter09.html"></span>

<span id="chapter09.html#page_197"></span>CHAPTER 9 []
---------------------------------------------------

**LATIN AMERICA** []
-----------------

 

*‘We like to be called the “continent of hope” . . .  
This hope is like a promise of heaven, an IOU  
whose payment is always put off.’*  
Pablo Neruda, Chilean poet and Nobel laureate

<span id="chapter09.html#page_198"></span><span
id="chapter09.html#page_199"></span>![illustration](media/prisoners-of-geography-assets/images/f0198-01.png)

 

<span id="chapter09.html#page_200"></span><span
class="big">L</span><small>ATIN AMERICA, PARTICULARLY ITS SOUTH, IS
PROOF THAT YOU</small> can bring the Old World’s knowledge and
technology to the new, but if geography is against you, then you will
have limited success, especially if you get the politics wrong. Just as
the geography of the USA helped it become a great power, so that of the
twenty countries to the south ensures that none will rise to seriously
challenge the North American giant this century nor come together to do
so collectively.

The limitations of Latin America’s geography were compounded right from
the beginning in the formation of its nation states. In the USA, once
the land had been taken from its original inhabitants, much of it was
sold or given away to small landholders; by contrast, in Latin America
the Old World culture of powerful landowners and serfs was imposed,
which led to inequality. On top of this, the European settlers
introduced another geographical problem that to this day holds many
countries back from developing their full potential: they stayed near
the coasts, especially (as we saw in Africa) in regions where the
interior was infested by mosquitos and disease. Most of the countries’
biggest cities, often the capitals, were therefore near the coasts, and
all roads from the interior were developed to connect to the capitals
but not to each other.

In some cases, for example in Peru and Argentina, the metropolitan area
of the capital city contains more than 30 per cent of the country’s
population. The colonialists concentrated on getting the wealth out of
each region, to the coast and on to foreign markets. Even after
independence the predominantly European coastal elites failed to invest
in the <span id="chapter09.html#page_201"></span>interior, and what
population centres there are inland remain poorly connected with each
other.

At the beginning of the 2010s it was fashionable among many business
leaders, professors and media analysts to argue passionately that we
were at the dawn of the ‘Latin American decade’. It has not come to
pass, and although the region has as yet unfulfilled potential, it will
constantly be fighting against the hand it was dealt by nature and
history.

Mexico is growing into a regional power, but it will always have the
desert wastelands in its north, its mountains to the east and west and
its jungles in the south, all physically limiting its economic growth.
Brazil has made its appearance on the world stage, but its internal
regions will remain isolated from each other; and Argentina and Chile,
despite their wealth of natural resources, will still be far further
away from New York and Washington than are Paris or London.

Two hundred years after the beginning of the struggle for independence,
the Latin American countries lag far behind the North Americans and the
Europeans. Their total population (including the Caribbean) is over 600
million, and yet their combined GDP is equivalent to that of France and
the UK, which together comprise about 125 million people. They have come
a long way since colonialism and slavery. There is still a long way to
go.

Latin America begins at the Mexican border with the USA and stretches
southwards 7,000 miles through Central America, and then South America,
before ending at Tierra del Fuego on Cape Horn where the world’s two
great oceans, the Pacific and the Atlantic, meet. At its widest point,
west to east, from Brazil across to Peru, it is 3,200 miles. On the
western side is the Pacific, on the other the Gulf of Mexico, the
Caribbean Sea and the Atlantic. None of the coastlines have many natural
deep harbours, thus limiting trade.

Central America is hill country with deep valleys and at its narrowest
point is only 120 miles across. Then, running parallel to the Pacific
<span id="chapter09.html#page_202"></span>for 4,500 miles, is the
longest continuous mountain chain in the world – the Andes. They are
snow-capped along their entire length and mostly impassable, thus
cutting many regions in the west of the continent off from the east. The
highest point in the Western Hemisphere is here – the 22,843-foot
Aconcagua Mountain – and the waters tumbling down from the mountain
range are a source of hydroelectric power for the Andean nations of
Chile, Peru, Ecuador, Colombia and Venezuela. Finally the land descends,
forests and glaciers appear, we are into the Chilean archipelago and
then – land’s end. The eastern side of Latin America is dominated by
Brazil and the Amazon river, the second-longest in the world after the
Nile.

One of the few things the countries have in common is language based on
Latin. Spanish is the language of almost all of them, but in Brazil it
is Portuguese, and in French Guiana – French. But this linguistic
connection disguises the differences in a continent that has five
different climatological regions. The relative flatland east of the
Andes and temperate climate of the lower third of South America, known
as the Southern Cone, are in stark contrast to the mountains and jungle
further north and enable agricultural and construction costs to be
reduced, thus making them some of the most profitable regions on the
entire continent – whereas Brazil, as we shall see, even has difficulty
moving goods around its own domestic market.

Academics and journalists are fond of writing that the continent is ‘at
a crossroads’ – as in about to embark at last on its great future. I
would argue that, geographically speaking, it is less at a crossroads
than at the bottom of the world; there’s a lot going on all over this
vast space, but the problem is, much of it is going on a long way from
anywhere other than itself. That may be considered a Northern
Hemispheric view, but it is also a view of where the major economic,
military and diplomatic powers are situated.

Despite its remoteness from history’s major population centres, there
<span id="chapter09.html#page_203"></span>have been people living south
of what is now the Mexico–USA border for about 15,000 years. They are
thought to have originated from Russia and crossed the Bering Strait on
foot at a time when it was still land. The present-day inhabitants are a
mixture of Europeans, Africans, indigenous tribes and the Mestizo
population, who are of European and native American descent.

This mix can be traced back to the Treaty of Tordesillas between Spain
and Portugal in 1494, one of the early examples of European colonialists
drawing lines on maps of faraway places about which they knew little –
or, in this case, nothing. As they set off westward to explore the
oceans, the two great European sea powers agreed that any land
discovered outside Europe would be shared between them. The Pope agreed.
The rest is a very unfortunate history in which the vast majority of the
occupants of the lands now called South America were wiped out.

The independence movements began in the early 1800s, led by Simón
Bolívar of Venezuela and José de San Martín of Argentina. Bolivar in
particular is etched in the collective consciousness of South America:
Bolivia is named in his honour, and the left-leaning countries of the
continent are loosely tied in a ‘Bolivarian’ ideology against the USA.
This is a fluctuating set of anti-colonialist/pro-socialist ideas which
often stray into nationalism as and when it suits the politicians who
espouse them.

In the nineteenth century many of the newly independent countries broke
apart, either through civil conflict or cross-border wars, but by the
end of that century the borders of the various states were mostly set.
The three richest nations – Brazil, Argentina and Chile – then set off
on a ruinously expensive naval arms race, which held back the
development of all three. There remain border disputes throughout the
continent, but the growth of democracy means that most are either frozen
or there are attempts to work them out diplomatically.

Particularly bitter is the relationship between Bolivia and Chile, which
dates back to the 1879 War of the Pacific in which Bolivia lost a large
<span id="chapter09.html#page_204"></span>chunk of its territory,
including 250 miles of coastline, and has been landlocked ever since. It
has never recovered from this blow, which partially explains why it is
among the poorest Latin American countries. This in turn has exacerbated
the severe divide between the mostly European lowlands population and
the mostly indigenous peoples of the highlands.

Time has not healed the wounds between them, nor those between the two
countries. Despite the fact that Bolivia has the third-largest reserves
of natural gas in South America it will not sell any to Chile, which is
in need of a reliable supplier. Two Bolivian presidents who toyed with
the idea were thrown out of office and the current president, Evo
Morales, has a ‘gas to Chile’ policy consisting of a ‘gas for coastline’
deal, which is dismissed by Chile despite its need for energy. National
pride and geographical need on both sides trump diplomatic compromise.

Another border dispute dating back to the nineteenth century is
indicated by the borders of the British territory of Belize and
neighbouring Guatemala. They are straight lines, such as we have seen in
Africa and the Middle East, and they were drawn by the British.
Guatemala claims Belize as part of its sovereign territory but, unlike
Bolivia, is unwilling to push the issue. Chile and Argentina argue over
the Beagle Channel water route, Venezuela claims half of Guyana, and
Ecuador has historical claims on Peru. This last example is one of the
more serious land disputes in the continent and has led to three border
wars over the past seventy-five years, the most recent being in 1995;
but again, the growth of democracy has eased tensions.

The second half of the twentieth century saw Central and South America
become a proxy battlefield of the Cold War with accompanying coups
d’état, military dictatorships and massive human rights abuses, for
example in Nicaragua. The end of the Cold War allowed many nations to
move towards democracy and, compared to the twentieth century, relations
between them are now relatively stable.

<span id="chapter09.html#page_205"></span>The Latin Americans, or at
least those south of Panama, mostly reside on, or near, the western and
eastern coasts, with the interior and the freezing cold far south very
sparsely populated. South America is in effect a demographically hollow
continent and its coastline is often referred to as the ‘populated rim’.
This is less true of Central America and especially Mexico, where the
populations are more equally distributed; but Mexico in particular has
difficult terrain, which limits its ambitions and foreign policies.

In its far north Mexico has a 2,000-mile-long border with the USA,
almost all of which is desert. The land here is so harsh that most of it
is uninhabited. This acts as a buffer zone between it and its giant
northern neighbour – but a buffer that is more advantageous to the
Americans than the Mexicans due to the disparity in their technology.
Militarily, only US forces could stage a major invasion across it; any
force coming the other way would be destroyed. As a barrier to illegal
entry into the USA it is useful, but porous – a problem with which
successive US administrations will have to deal.

All Mexicans know that before the 1846–8 war with the United States the
land which is now Texas, California, New Mexico and Arizona was part of
Mexico. The conflict led to half of Mexico’s territory being ceded to
the USA. However, there is no serious political movement to regain the
region and no pressing border dispute between the two countries.
Throughout most of the twentieth century they squabbled over a small
piece of land after the Rio Grande changed course in the 1850s, but in
1967 both sides agreed the area was legally part of Mexico.

By the middle of the twenty-first century Hispanics are likely to be the
largest ethnic group in the four US states listed above, and many will
be of Mexican origin. There may eventually be Spanish-speaking political
movements on both sides of the US–Mexican border calling for
reunification, but tempering this would be the fact that many US Latinos
will not have Mexican heritage, and that Mexico is unlikely to have
anything <span id="chapter09.html#page_206"></span>approaching the
living standards of the US. The Mexican government struggles to control
even its own territory – it will not be in a position to take on any
more in the foreseeable future. Mexico is destined to live in the USA’s
shadow and as such will always play the subservient role in bilateral
relations. It lacks a navy capable of securing the Gulf of Mexico or
pushing out into the Atlantic, and so relies on the US navy to ensure
the sea lanes remain open and safe.

Private companies from both nations have set up factories just south of
the border to cut costs in labour and transport, but the region is
hostile to human existence and will remain the buffer land across which
many of the poor of Latin America will continue to cross as they seek
entry, legal or illegal, to the Promised Land to the north.

Mexico’s major mountain ranges, the Sierra Madres, dominate the west and
east of the country and between them is a plateau. In the south, in the
Valley of Mexico, is the capital – Mexico City – one of the world’s mega
capital cities with a population of around 20 million people.

On the western slopes of the highlands and in the valleys the soil is
poor, and the rivers of limited assistance in moving goods to market. On
the eastern slopes the land is more fertile, but the rugged terrain
still prevents Mexico from developing as it would like. To the south lie
the borders with Belize and Guatemala. Mexico has little interest in
expanding southward because the land quickly rises to become the sort of
mountainous terrain it is difficult to conquer or control. Extending
into either country would not enlarge the limited amount of profitable
land Mexico already has. It has no ideological territorial ambitions and
instead concentrates on trying to develop its limited oil-producing
industry and attracting more investment into its factories. Besides,
Mexico has enough internal problems to cope with, without getting into
any foreign adventures – perhaps none greater than its role in
satisfying the Americans’ voracious appetite for drugs.

The Mexican border has always been a haven for smugglers, but never
<span id="chapter09.html#page_207"></span>more so than in the last
twenty years. This is a direct result of the US government’s policy in
Colombia, 1,500 miles away to the south.

It was President Nixon in the 1970s who first declared a ‘War on Drugs’,
which, like a ‘War on Terror’, is a somewhat nebulous concept in which
victory cannot be achieved. However it wasn’t until the early 1990s that
Washington took the war directly to the Colombian drug cartels with
overt assistance to the Colombian government. It also had success in
closing down many of the air and sea drug routes from Colombia into the
USA.

The cartels responded by creating a land route – up through Central
America and Mexico, and into the American Southwest. This in turn led
the Mexican drug gangs to get in on the action by facilitating the
routes and manufacturing their own produce. The multibillion-dollar
business sparked local turf wars, with the winners using their new power
and money to infiltrate and corrupt the Mexican police and military and
get inside the political and business elites.

In this there are parallels with the heroin trade in Afghanistan. Many
of the Afghan farmers growing the poppy crop responded to NATO’s
attempts to destroy their traditional way of making a living by either
taking up arms or supporting the Taliban. It may be the government’s
policy to wage a ‘War on Drugs’, but this does not mean that the orders
are carried out at a regional level, which the Afghan drug lords have
penetrated. So it is in Mexico.

Throughout history, successive governments in Mexico City have never had
a firm grip on the country. Now its opponents, the drug cartels, have
paramilitary wings which are as well armed as the forces of the state,
often better paid, more motivated, and in several regions are regarded
as a source of employment by some members of the public. The vast sums
of money made by the gangs now swill around the country, much of it
being washed through what appear on the surface to be legitimate
businesses.

The overland supply route is firmly established, and the demand in <span
id="chapter09.html#page_208"></span>the USA shows few signs of
diminishing. All Mexican governments try to keep on the right side of
their powerful neighbour and have responded to American pressure by
waging their own ‘War on Drugs’. Here lies a conundrum. Mexico makes its
living by supplying consumer goods to America, and as long as Americans
consume drugs, Mexicans will supply them – after all, the idea here is
to make things which are cheap to produce and sell them at prices higher
than those in legal trade. Without drugs the country would be even
poorer than it is, as a vast amount of foreign money would be cut off.
With drugs, it is even more violent than it would otherwise be. The same
is true of some of the countries to Mexico’s south.

Central America has little going for it by way of geography, but for one
thing. It is thin. So far the only country to gain advantage from this
has been Panama, but with the arrival of new money from China that may
be about to change.

![illustration](media/prisoners-of-geography-assets/images/f0208-01.png)

Central America could see many changes in the regions that are receiving
Chinese investment, such as the development of the Nicaragua Grand
Canal.

<span id="chapter09.html#page_209"></span>Modern technology means the
Chinese can see from a glance at a satellite photograph the trade
opportunities this thin stretch of land might bring. In 1513 the Spanish
explorer Vasco Núñez de Balboa had to sail across the Atlantic, land in
what is now Panama, then trek through jungles and over mountains before
seeing before him another vast ocean – the Pacific. The advantages of
linking them were obvious, but it was another 401 years before
technology caught up with geography. In 1914 the newly built,
50-mile-long, American-controlled Panama Canal opened, thus saving an
8,000-mile journey from the Atlantic to the Pacific oceans and leading
to economic growth in the canal region.

Since 1999 the canal has been controlled by Panama, but is regarded as a
neutral international waterway which is safeguarded by the US and Panama
navies. And therein, for the Chinese, lies a problem.

Panama and the USA are friends – in fact, such good friends that in 2014
Venezuela briefly cut ties with Panama, calling it a ‘US lackey’. The
effect of the rhetoric of the increasingly embattled country’s
Bolivarian revolutionary era is tempered by the knowledge that the
United States is Venezuela’s most important commercial partner and that
Venezuela supplies around 10 per cent of US oil imports. The energy
trade between them is likely to fall as the effects of the US shale
revolution kick in, but Beijing will be a willing importer of Venezuelan
oil, and is working on how to get it to China without relying on the
route through Panama.

China, as we saw in [Chapter Two](#chapter02.html), has designs on being
a global power and to achieve this aim it will need to keep sea lanes
open for its commerce and its navy. The Panama Canal may well be a
neutral passageway, but at the end of the day passage through it is
dependent on American goodwill. So, why not build your own canal up the
road in Nicaragua? After all, what’s $50 billion to a growing
superpower?

The Nicaragua Grand Canal project is funded by a Hong Kong <span
id="chapter09.html#page_210"></span>businessman named Wang Jing who has
made a lot of money in telecommunications but has no experience of
engineering, let alone masterminding one of the most ambitious
construction projects in the history of the world. Mr Wang is adamant
that the Chinese government is not involved in the project. Given the
nature of China’s business culture and the participation of its
government in all aspects of life, this is unusual.

The $50 billion cost estimate for the project, which is due for
completion in the early 2020s, is four times the size of the entire
Nicaraguan economy and forms part of the substantial investment in Latin
America by China, which is slowly but steadily supplanting the USA as
the region’s main trading partner. Exactly who is financially backing Mr
Wang is unclear, but Nicaragua’s President Daniel Ortega signed up to
the plan with alacrity and with scarcely a glance at the 30,000-plus
people who may be required to move from their lands because of the
project.

The former revolutionary socialist Sandinista firebrand now finds
himself accused of being on the side of big business. The canal will
split the country in two, and six municipalities will find themselves
divided. There will only be one bridge across the canal along its entire
length. Ortega must know he risks sowing the seeds of dissent, but
argues that the project will bring tens of thousands of jobs and
much-needed investment and revenue to the second-poorest country in the
Western Hemisphere.

The Nicaraguan canal will be longer than the Panama and, crucially, will
be significantly wider and deeper, thus allowing much bigger tankers and
container ships through, not to mention large Chinese naval vessels. It
will run directly east to west, whereas the Panama Canal actually runs
north to south. The middle section will be dredged out of Lake
Nicaragua, which has led environmentalists to warn that Latin America’s
largest freshwater lake may become contaminated.

Given that the Panama Canal a few hundred miles to the south is being
widened, sceptics ask why the Nicaraguan version is necessary. China
will have control of a canal able to take bigger ships, which will <span
id="chapter09.html#page_211"></span>help to guarantee the economies of
scale only China is capable of. There are questions about the future
profitability of the Nicaraguan canal – it may take decades to make
money – but this is a project that appears to be more about the national
interests of China than about commercial profit.

Gouging a link between two oceans out of a nation state is just the most
visible sign of China’s investment in Latin America. We’ve grown used to
seeing the Chinese as major players in Africa, but for twenty years now
they have been quietly moving in south of the Rio Grande.

As well as investing in construction projects, China is lending huge
sums of money to Latin American governments, notably those in Argentina,
Venezuela and Ecuador. In return China will be expecting support in the
United Nations for its regional claims back home, including the issue of
Taiwan.

Beijing is also buying. The Latin American states have been picked off
one by one by the USA, which prefers bilateral trade deals to doing
business with the region as a whole, as they have to do with the EU. The
Chinese are doing the same thing but at least offer an alternative, thus
reducing the region’s dependency on the USA as its market. For example,
China has now replaced the USA as Brazil’s main trading partner, and may
do the same with several other Latin American countries.

The Latin American countries do not have a natural affinity with the
USA. Relations are dominated by America’s starting position, laid out in
the Monroe Doctrine of 1823 (as we have seen in [Chapter
Three](#chapter03.html)) during President Monroe’s State of the Union
address. The Doctrine warned off the European colonialists and said, in
as many words, that Latin America was the USA’s backyard and sphere of
influence. It has been orchestrating events there ever since and many
Latin Americans believe the end results have not always been positive.

Eight decades after Monroe’s Doctrine, along came another president with
‘Monroe reloaded’. In a speech in 1904 Theodore ‘Teddy’ Roosevelt said:
‘In the Western Hemisphere the adherence of the United States to <span
id="chapter09.html#page_212"></span>the Monroe Doctrine may force the
United States, however reluctantly, in flagrant cases of \[such\]
wrongdoing or impotence, to the exercise of an international police
power.’ In other words, the USA could militarily intervene whenever it
chose to in the Western Hemisphere. Not including the funding of
revolutions, the arming of groups and the provision of military
trainers, the USA used force in Latin America almost 50 times between
1890 and the end of the Cold War.

After that, overt interference dropped off rapidly and in 2001 the USA
was a signatory to the thirty-four-nation Inter-American Democratic
Charter drafted by the Organization of American States, which proclaims
that ‘The peoples of the Americas have a right to democracy and their
governments have an obligation to promote and defend it.’ Since then the
USA has concentrated on binding the Latin American countries to itself
economically by building up existing trade pacts like the North American
Free Trade Association, and introducing others such as the Central
American Free Trade Agreement.

The lack of warmth thus engendered in south/north historic and economic
relationships meant that when the Chinese came knocking, doors quickly
opened. Beijing now sells or donates arms to Uruguay, Colombia, Chile,
Mexico and Peru, and offers them military exchanges. It is trying to
build a military relationship with Venezuela, which it hopes will
outlast the Bolivarian revolution if and when it collapses. The arms
supplies to Latin America are relatively small-scale but complement
China’s efforts at soft power. Its sole hospital ship, *Peace Ark*,
visited the region in 2011. It is only a 300-bed vessel, dwarfed by the
American 1,000-bed versions which also visit, but it was a signal of
intent and a reminder that China increasingly ‘gets’ soft power.

However, with or without Chinese trade, the countries of Latin America
are inescapably locked into a geographical region – which means that the
USA will always be a major player.

Brazil, which makes up fully one-third of the land of South America,
<span id="chapter09.html#page_213"></span>is the best example. It is
almost as big as the USA, and its twenty-seven federal states equal an
area bigger than the twenty-eight EU countries combined; but unlike them
it lacks the infrastructure to be as rich. A third of Brazil is jungle,
where it is painfully expensive, and in some areas illegal, to carve out
land fit for modern human habitation. The destruction of the Amazon
Rainforest is a long-term ecological problem for the whole world, but it
is also a medium-term problem for Brazil: the government allows
slash-and-burn farmers to cut down the jungle and then use the land for
agriculture. But the soil is so poor that within a few years
crop-growing is untenable. The farmers move on to cut down more
rainforest, and once the rainforest is cut it does not grow back. The
climate and soil work against the development of agriculture.

The River Amazon may be navigable in parts, but its banks are muddy and
the surrounding land makes it difficult to build on. This problem, too,
seriously limits the amount of profitable land available. Just below the
Amazon region, in the highlands, is the savannah and, by contrast, it is
a success story. Twenty-five years ago this area was considered unfit
for agriculture, but Brazilian technology has turned it into one of the
world’s largest producer of soybeans, which – together with the growth
in grain production – means the country is becoming a major agricultural
producer.

To the south of the savannah are the traditional Brazilian agricultural
lands. We are now in the Southern Cone of South America, which Brazil
shares with Argentina, Uruguay and Chile. The relatively small Brazilian
section is where the first Portuguese colonialists lived, and it was to
be 300 years before the population could push out from this heartland
and significantly populate the rest of the country. To this day most
people still live close to the coastal areas, despite the dramatic
decision made in the late 1950s to move the capital (previously Rio de
Janeiro) several hundred miles inland to the purpose-built city of
Brasilia in an attempt to develop the heart of Brazil.

<span id="chapter09.html#page_214"></span>The southern agricultural
heartland is about the size of Spain, Portugal and Italy combined and is
much flatter than the rest of the country. It is relatively well
watered, but most of it is in the interior of the region and lacks
properly developed transport routes.

The same is true of most of Brazil. If you look at many of the Brazilian
coastal cities from the sea there is usually a massive cliff rising
dramatically out of the water either side of the urban area, or directly
behind it. Known as the Grand Escarpment, it dominates much of Brazil’s
coast; it is the end of the plateau called the Brazilian Shield which
makes up most of Brazil’s interior.

Because the country lacks a coastal plain, to connect its major coastal
cities you need to build routes up and over the escarpment, along to the
next urban area and then back down. The lack of decent modern roads is
compounded by a similar deficiency of rail track. This is not a recipe
for profitable trading or for unifying a large space politically.

It gets worse. Brazil does not have direct access to the rivers of the
Rio de la Plata region. The River Plate itself empties out into the
Atlantic in Argentina, meaning that for centuries traders have moved
their goods down the Plate to Buenos Aires rather than carry them up and
down the Grand Escarpment to get to Brazil’s underdeveloped ports. The
Texas-based geopolitical intelligence company
[Stratfor.com](http://Stratfor.com) estimates that Brazil’s seven
largest ports combined can handle fewer goods per year than the single
American port of New Orleans.

Therefore Brazil lacks the volume of trade it would like and, equally
importantly, most of its goods are moved along its inadequate roads
rather than by river, thus increasing costs. On the plus side Brazil is
working on its transport infrastructure, and the newly discovered
offshore gas reserves will help pay for this, reduce reliance on
Bolivian and Venezuelan energy imports and cushion the inevitable
economic dips all nations suffer. Nevertheless, Brazil will require a
Herculean effort for it to overcome its geographical disadvantages.

Around 25 per cent of Brazilians are thought to live in the infamous
<span id="chapter09.html#page_215"></span>favela slums. When one in four
of a state’s population is in abject poverty it is difficult for that
state to become rich. This does not mean Brazil is not a rising power,
just that its rise will be limited.

A shortcut to growth could be soft power, hence Brazil’s efforts to gain
a permanent seat on the UN Security Council and its habit of building
regional economic alliances such as Mercosur, which loosely ties
together Brazil, Argentina, Paraguay, Uruguay and Venezuela. Every few
years, often led by Brazil, the South Americans attempt to launch their
version of the EU – the latest incarnation being UNASUR, of which twelve
South American nations are members. Its headquarters is in Ecuador but
Brazil has the loudest voice. In this it resembles the EU, which has an
HQ in Belgium and a leading power in Germany. And there the comparison
stops. UNASUR has an impressive presence on the internet but it remains
more of a website than an economic union. The EU countries have similar
political and economic systems and most members share a currency,
whereas the Latin Americans differ in their politics, economics,
currencies, education levels and labour laws. They also have to overcome
the constraints of distance, as well as the heights of the mountains and
the density of the jungles which separate them.

But Brazil will keep working to help create a South American powerhouse
using its diplomatic and increasing economic strength. The country is by
nature non-confrontational, its foreign policy is against intervention
in other countries, and war with any of its neighbours seems highly
unlikely. It has managed to maintain good relations with all the other
eleven South American nations despite having a border with nine of them.

There is a frontier dispute with Uruguay, but it does not look set to
become inflamed; and the rivalry between Brazil and Argentina is
unlikely to be played out anywhere more politically significant than a
football pitch. In recent years Brazil has moved army units away from
its border with Argentina and has seen its Spanish-speaking neighbour
<span id="chapter09.html#page_216"></span>reciprocate. An Argentinian
navy vessel has been welcomed in a Brazilian port whereas a British
Royal Navy ship was denied such access a few years ago, thus pleasing
the Argentinians in their ongoing diplomatic battle with the UK over the
Falkland Islands.

Brazil is included in the BRICS – a group of major countries said to be
on the rise both economically and politically, but, while each one may
be rising individually, the concept is more fashion than reality.
Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa are not a political or
geographical grouping in a meaningful way and have very little in common
with each other. If the letters had not spelt what sounds like a word
then the BRICS theory would not have caught on. The BRICS hold an annual
conference and Brazil does sometimes liaise with India and South Africa
on international issues in a sort of vague echo of the Cold War
Non-Aligned Movement, but it does not join Russia and China in taking a
sometimes hostile stance towards the USA.

The North and South American giants did fall out in 2013 over an issue
which still rankles in Brazil. The news that the US National Security
Agency had spied on the Brazilian President, Dilma Rousseff, led her to
cancel a state visit to Washington. That an apology was not forthcoming
from the Obama administration was testament to the fact that the
Americans are irritated that China has supplanted them as Brazil’s main
trading partner. Brazil’s subsequent decision to buy Swedish fighter
jets for its air force rather than ones from Boeing is thought to have
been informed by the row. However, the state-to-state relationship has
partially recovered, albeit not at presidential level. Confrontation is
not Brazil’s style, unlike Venezuela under the late President Chavez.
The Brazilians know the world thinks they are a coming power, but they
also know that their power will never match that of the Americans.

Neither will that of Argentina; however, in some ways it is better
placed to become a First World country than is Brazil. It lacks the size
and population to become *the* primary regional power in Latin America,
<span id="chapter09.html#page_217"></span>which looks to be Brazil’s
destiny, but it has the quality of land to create a standard of living
comparable to that of the European countries. That does not mean it will
achieve this potential – simply that, if Argentina gets the economics
right, its geography will enable it to become the power it has never
been.

The foundations for this potential were laid in the nineteenth century
with military victories over Brazil and Paraguay that resulted in
control of the flat agricultural regions of the Rio de la Plata, the
navigable river system, and therefore the commerce which flows down it
towards Buenos Aires and its port. This is among the most valuable
pieces of real estate on the whole continent. It immediately gave
Argentina an economic and strategic advantage over Brazil, Paraguay and
Uruguay – one it holds to this day.

However, Argentina has not always used its advantages to the full. A
hundred years ago it was among the ten richest countries in the world –
ahead of France and Italy. But a failure to diversify, a stratified and
unfair society, a poor education system, a succession of coups d’état
and the wildly differing economic policies in the democratic period of
the last thirty years have seen a sharp decline in Argentina’s status.

The Brazilians have a joke about their snobbish neighbours, as they see
them: ‘Only people this sophisticated could make a mess this big.’
Argentina needs to get it right, and a dead cow may help it.

The Dead Cow, or Vaca Muerta, is a shale formation which, combined with
the country’s other shale areas, could provide Argentina’s energy needs
for the next 150 years with excess to export. It is situated halfway
down Argentina, in Patagonia, and abuts the western border with Chile.
It is the size of Belgium – which might be relatively small for a
country, but is large for a shale formation. So far, so good, unless you
are against shale-produced energy – but there is a catch. To get the gas
and oil out of the shale will require massive foreign investment, and
Argentina is not considered a foreign investment-friendly country.

<span id="chapter09.html#page_218"></span>There’s more oil and gas
further south – in fact, so far south it’s offshore in and around
islands which are British and have been since 1833. And therein lies a
problem, and a news story which never goes away.

What Britain calls the Falkland Islands are known as Las Malvinas by
Argentina, and woe befall any Argentine who uses the ‘F’ word. It is an
offence in Argentina to produce a map which describes the islands as
anything other than the ‘Islas Malvinas’ and all primary school children
are taught to draw the outlines of the two main islands, west and east.
To regain the ‘Lost Little Sisters’ is a national cause for successive
generations of Argentines and one which most of their Latin neighbours
support.

In April 1982 the British let their guard down and the Argentinian
military dictatorship under General Galtieri ordered an invasion of the
islands – which was considered a huge success until the British task
force arrived eight weeks later and made short work of the Argentinian
army and reclaimed the territory. This in turn led to the fall of the
dictatorship.

If the Argentine invasion had happened in the present decade Britain
would not have been in a position to retake the islands, as it currently
has no functioning aircraft carriers – a situation that will be remedied
by 2020, at which time Argentina’s window of opportunity closes.
However, despite the lure of oil and gas, an Argentinian invasion of the
Falklands is unlikely for two reasons.

Firstly, Argentina is now a democracy and knows that the vast majority
of Falkland Islanders wish to remain under British control; secondly,
the British, once bitten, are twice shy. They may temporarily lack an
aircraft carrier to sail the 8,000 miles down to the South Atlantic, but
they do now have several hundred combat troops on the islands, along
with advanced radar systems, ground-to-air missiles, four Eurofighter
jets and probably a nuclear attack submarine lurking nearby most of the
time. The British intend to prevent the Argentinians from even thinking
they could get onto the beaches, let alone take the islands.

<span id="chapter09.html#page_219"></span>The Argentine air force uses
planes which are decades behind the Eurofighter, and British diplomacy
has ensured that an attempt by Argentina to buy up-to-date models from
Spain was called off. Buying from the USA is a non-starter due to the
Special Relationship between the UK and USA, which is indeed, at times,
special; so the chances of Argentina being in a position to mount
another attack before 2020 are slim.

However, that will not calm the diplomatic war, and Argentina has
sharpened its weapons on that front. Buenos Aires has warned that any
oil firm which drills in the Falklands/Malvinas cannot bid for a licence
to exploit the shale oil and gas in Patagonia’s Vaca Muerta field. It
has even passed a law threatening fines or imprisonment for individuals
who explore the Falklands’ continental shelf without its permission.
This has put many big oil companies off, but not of course the British.
However, whoever probes the potential wealth beneath the South Atlantic
waters will be operating in one of the most challenging environments in
the business. Its gets somewhat cold and windy down there, and the seas
are rough.

We have travelled as far south as you can go before you arrive at the
frozen wastelands of the Antarctic. While plenty of countries would like
to exert control there, a combination of the extremely challenging
environment, the Antarctic Treaty and lack of obtainable and valuable
resources, together largely prevent overt competition, at least for the
present. The same cannot be said of its northern counterpart. Heading
straight up from Antarctica to the northernmost part of the globe, you
reach a place destined to be a diplomatic battleground in the
twenty-first century as countries great and small strive to reach pole
position there: the Arctic.

<span id="chapter10.html"></span>

<span id="chapter10.html#page_220"></span><span id="chapter10.html#page_221"></span>CHAPTER 10 []
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE ARCTIC** []
--------------

 

*‘There are two kinds of Arctic problems, the imaginary and the real. Of
the two, the imaginary are the most real.’*  
Vilhjalmur Stefansson, *The Arctic in Fact and Fable*

<span id="chapter10.html#page_222"></span><span
id="chapter10.html#page_223"></span>![illustration](media/prisoners-of-geography-assets/images/f0222-01.png)

 

<span id="chapter10.html#page_224"></span><span
class="big">W</span><small>HEN THE ICEMEN COME, THEY WILL COME IN
FORCE</small>. Who has the force? The Russians. No one else has such a
heavy presence in the region or is as well prepared to tackle the
severity of the conditions. All the other nations are lagging behind
and, in the case of the USA, do not appear to be even trying to catch
up: America is an Arctic nation without an Arctic strategy in a region
that is heating up.

The effects of global warming are now showing more than ever in the
Arctic: the ice is melting, allowing easier access to the region,
coinciding with the discovery of energy deposits and the development of
technology to get at them – all of which has focused the Arctic nations’
attention on the potential gains and losses to be made in the world’s
most difficult environment. Many of the countries in the region have
competing claims which they haven’t bothered to press – until now. But
there is a lot to claim, and a lot to argue about.

The word ‘arctic’ comes from the Greek *artikos*, which means ‘near the
bear’, and is a reference to the Ursa Major constellation whose last two
stars point towards the North Star.

The Arctic Ocean is 5.4 million square miles; this might make it the
world’s smallest ocean but it is still almost as big as Russia, and one
and a half times the size of the USA. The continental shelves on its
ocean bed occupy more space proportionally than any other ocean, which
is one of the reasons why it can be hard to agree on areas of
sovereignty.

The Arctic region includes land in parts of Canada, Finland, Greenland,
Iceland, Norway, Russia, Sweden and the USA (Alaska). It is a land of
extremes: for brief periods in the summer the temperature <span
id="chapter10.html#page_225"></span>can reach 26 degrees Celsius in some
places, but for long periods in winter it plunges to below minus 45.
There are expanses of rock scoured by the freezing winds, spectacular
fjords, polar deserts and even rivers. It is place of great hostility
and great beauty that has captivated people for millennia.

The first recorded expedition was in 330 <small>BCE</small> by a Greek
mariner called Pytheas of Massilia, who found a strange land called
‘Thule’. Back home in the Mediterranean, few believed his startling
tales of pure white landscapes, frozen seas and strange creatures
including great white bears; but Pytheas was just the first of many
people over the centuries to record the wonder of the Arctic and to
succumb to the emotions it evokes.

Many also succumbed to its deprivations, especially those voyaging to
the edge of the known world in search of what doubters said was the
‘mythical’ Northwest Passage through the Arctic Ocean, linking the
Atlantic to the Pacific Ocean. One example is Henry Hudson. He may have
the second-largest bay in the world named after him, but back in 1607 he
probably would have preferred to live into old age rather than be cast
adrift and almost certainly sent to his death by a mutinous crew sick of
his voyages of discovery.

As for the first person to reach the ‘North Pole’, well, that’s a tricky
one given that, even though there is a fixed point on the globe denoting
its position, below it the ice you are standing on is moving, and
without GPS equipment it is hard to tell exactly where you are. Sir
Edward Parry, minus a GPS, tried in 1827, but the ice was moving south
faster than he could move north and he ended up going backwards; but he
did at least survive.

Captain Sir John Franklin had less luck when he attempted to cross the
last non-navigated section of the Northwest Passage in 1845. His two
ships became stuck in the ice near King William Island in the Canadian
archipelago. All 129 members of the expedition perished, some on board
the ships, others after they abandoned the vessels and began walking
<span id="chapter10.html#page_226"></span>south. Several expeditions
were sent to search for survivors but they found only a handful of
skeletons, and heard stories from Inuit hunters about dozens of white
men who had died walking through the frozen landscape. The ships had
vanished completely, but in 2014 technology caught up with geography and
a Canadian search team using sonar located one of the vessels, HMS
*Erebus*, on the seabed of the Northwest Passage and brought up the
ship’s bell.

The fate of Franklin’s expedition did not deter many more adventurers
from trying to find their way through the archipelago, but it wasn’t
until 1905 that the great Norwegian explorer Roald Amundsen charted his
way across in a smaller ship with just five other crew. He passed King
William Island, went through the Bering Strait and into the Pacific. He
knew he’d made it when he spotted a whaling ship from San Francisco
coming from the other direction. In his diary he confessed his emotions
got the better of him, an occurrence perhaps almost as rare as his great
achievement: ‘The Northwest Passage was done. My boyhood dream – at that
moment it was accomplished. A strange feeling welled up in my throat; I
was somewhat over-strained and worn – it was weakness in me – but I felt
tears in my eyes.’

Twenty years later he decided he wanted to be the first man to fly over
the North Pole which, although easier than walking across it, is no mean
feat. Along with his Italian pilot Umberto Nobile and fourteen crew he
flew a semi-rigid airship over the ice and dropped Norwegian, Italian
and American flags from a height of 300 feet. A heroic effort this may
have been, but in the twenty-first century it was not seen as one giving
much legal basis to any claims of ownership of the region by those three
countries.

That also applies to the impressive effort of Shinji Kazama of Japan,
who in 1987 became the first person to reach the North Pole on a
motorbike. Mr Kazama was so intrepid as not to have relied on a
shrinking polar ice cap, and is the sort of man who would have ridden
through a <span id="chapter10.html#page_227"></span>blizzard in order to
get into the history books, but there is no doubt that there is now less
ice to cross.

That the ice is receding is not in question – satellite imaging over the
past decade clearly shows that the ice has shrunk – only the cause is in
doubt. Most scientists are convinced that man is responsible, not merely
natural climate cycles, and that the coming exploitation of what is
unveiled will quicken the pace.

![illustration](media/prisoners-of-geography-assets/images/f0227-01.png)

It is clear from satellite images that the ice in the Arctic is
receding, making the sea lanes through the region more accessible for
longer periods of the year.

<span id="chapter10.html#page_228"></span>Already villages along the
Bering and Chukchi coasts have been relocated as coastlines are eroded
and hunting grounds lost. A biological reshuffle is under way. Polar
bears and Arctic foxes are on the move, walruses find themselves
competing for space, and fish, unaware of territorial boundaries, are
moving northward, depleting stocks for some countries but populating
others. Mackerel and Atlantic cod are now being found in Arctic trawler
nets.

The effects of the melting ice won’t just be felt in the Arctic:
countries as far away as the Maldives, Bangladesh and the Netherlands
are at risk of increased flooding as the ice melts and sea levels rise.
These knock-on effects are why the Arctic is a global, not just a
regional, issue.

As the ice melts and the tundra is exposed, two things are likely to
happen to accelerate the process of the greying of the ice cap. Residue
from the industrial work destined to take place will land on the snow
and ice, further reducing the amount of heat-reflecting territory. The
darker-coloured land and open water will then absorb more heat than the
ice and snow they replace, thus increasing the size of the darker
territory. This is known as the Albedo effect, and although there are
negative aspects to it there are also positive ones: the warming tundra
will allow significantly more natural plant growth and agricultural
crops to flourish, helping local populations as they seek new food
sources.

There is, though, no getting away from the prospect that one of the
world’s last great unspoiled regions is about to change. Some
climate-prediction models say the Arctic will be ice-free in summer by
the end of the century; there are a few which predict it could happen
much sooner. What is certain is that, however quickly it happens and
dramatic the reduction will be, it has begun.

The melting of the ice cap already allows cargo ships to make the
journey through the Northwest Passage in the Canadian archipelago for
<span id="chapter10.html#page_229"></span>several summer weeks a year,
thus cutting at least a week from the transit time from Europe to China.
The first cargo ship not to be escorted by an icebreaker went through in
2014. The *Nunavik* carried 23,000 tons of nickel ore from Canada to
China. The polar route was 40 per cent shorter and used deeper waters
than if it had gone through the Panama Canal. This allowed the ship to
carry more cargo, saved tens of thousands of dollars in fuel costs and
reduced the ship’s greenhouse emissions by 1,300 metric tons. By 2040
the route is expected to be open for up to two months each year,
transforming trade links across the ‘High North’ and causing knock-on
effects as far away as Egypt and Panama in terms of the revenues they
enjoy from the Suez and Panama canals.

The north-east route, or Northern Sea Route as the Russians call it,
which hugs the Siberian coastline, is also now open for several months a
year and is becoming an increasingly popular sea highway.

The melting ice reveals other potential riches. It is thought that vast
quantities of undiscovered natural gas and oil reserves may lie in the
Arctic region in areas which can now be accessed. In 2008 the United
States Geological Survey estimated that 1,670 trillion cubic feet of
natural gas, 44 billion barrels of natural gas liquids and 90 billion
barrels of oil are in the Arctic, with the vast majority of it offshore.
As more territory becomes accessible, extra reserves of the gold, zinc,
nickel and iron already found in part of the Arctic may be discovered.

ExxonMobil, Shell and Rosneft are among the energy giants that are
applying for licences and beginning exploratory drilling. Countries and
companies prepared to make the effort to get at the riches will have to
brave a climate where for much of the year the days are endless night,
where for the majority of the year the sea freezes to a depth of more
than six feet and where, in open water, the waves can reach forty feet
high.

It is going to be dirty, hard and dangerous work, especially for anyone
hoping to run an all-year-round operation. It will also require massive
investment. Running gas pipelines will not be possible in many places,
<span id="chapter10.html#page_230"></span>and building a complex
liquefaction infrastructure at sea, especially in tough conditions, is
very expensive. However, the financial and strategic gains to be made
mean that the big players will try to stake a claim to the territories
and begin drilling, and that the potential environmental consequences
are unlikely to stop them.

The claims to sovereignty are not based on the flags of the early
explorers but on the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
(UNCLOS). This affirms that a signatory to the convention has exclusive
economic rights from its shore to a limit of 200 nautical miles (unless
this conflicts with another country’s limits), and can declare it an
Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ). The oil and gas in the zone is therefore
considered to belong to the state. In certain circumstances, and subject
to scientific evidence concerning a country’s continental shelf, that
country can apply to extend the EEZ to 350 nautical miles from its
coast.

The melting of the Arctic ice is bringing with it a hardening of
attitude from the eight members of the Arctic Council, the forum where
geopolitics becomes geopolarctics.

The ‘Arctic Five’, those states with borders on the Arctic Ocean, are
Canada, Russia, the USA, Norway and Denmark (due to its responsibility
for Greenland). They are joined by Iceland, Finland and Sweden, which
are also full members. There are twelve other nations with Permanent
Observer status having recognised the ‘Arctic States’ sovereignty,
sovereign rights and jurisdiction’ in the region, among other criteria.
For example, at the 2013 Arctic Council, Japan and India, which have
sponsored Arctic scientific expeditions, and China, which has a science
base on a Norwegian island as well as a modern icebreaker, were granted
Observer status.

However, there are countries not in the Council which say they have
legitimate interests in the region, and still more which argue that
under the theory of the ‘common heritage of mankind’ the Arctic should
be open to everyone.

<span id="chapter10.html#page_231"></span>There currently are at least
nine legal disputes and claims over sovereignty in the Arctic Ocean, all
legally complicated, and some with the potential to cause serious
tensions between the nations. One of the most brazen comes from the
Russians: Moscow has already put a marker down – a long way down. In
2007 it sent two manned submersibles 13,980 feet below the waves to the
seabed of the North Pole and planted a rust-proof titanium Russian flag
as a statement of ambition. As far as is known, it still ‘flies’ down
there today. A Russian think-tank followed this up by suggesting that
the Arctic be renamed. After not much thought they came up with an
alternative: ‘the Russian Ocean’.

Elsewhere Russia argues that the Lomonosov Ridge off its Siberian coast
is an extension of Siberia’s continental shelf, and therefore belongs to
Russia exclusively. This is problematic for other countries, given that
the Ridge extends all the way to the North Pole.

Russia and Norway have particular difficulty in the Barents Sea. Norway
claims the Gakkel Ridge in the Barents Sea as an extension of its EEZ,
but the Russians dispute this, and they have a particular dispute over
the Svalbard Islands, the northernmost point on Earth with a settled
population. Most countries and international organisations recognise the
islands as being under (limited) Norwegian sovereignty, but the biggest
island, Spitsbergen, has a growing population of Russian migrants who
have assembled around the coal-mining industry there. The mines are not
profitable, but the Russian community serves as a useful tool in
furthering Moscow’s claims on all of the Svalbard Islands. At a time of
Russia’s choosing it can raise tensions and justify its actions using
geological claims and the ‘facts on the ground’ of the Russian
population.

Norway, a NATO state, knows what is coming and has made the High North
its foreign policy priority. Its air force regularly intercepts Russian
fighter jets approaching its borders; the heightened tensions have
caused it to move its centre of military operations from the south of
the country to the north, and it is building an Arctic Battalion. Canada
is reinforcing <span id="chapter10.html#page_232"></span>its
cold-weather military capabilities, and Denmark has also reacted to
Moscow’s muscle-flexing by creating an Arctic Response Force.

Russia, meanwhile, is building an Arctic Army. Six new military bases
are being constructed and several mothballed Cold War installations,
such as those on the Novosibirsk Islands, are reopening, and airstrips
are being renovated. A force of at least 6,000 combat soldiers is being
readied for the Murmansk region and will include two mechanised infantry
brigades equipped with snowmobiles and hovercraft.

It is no coincidence that Murmansk is now called ‘Russia’s northern
energy gateway’ and that President Putin has said that, in relation to
energy supply, ‘Offshore fields, especially in the Arctic, are without
any exaggeration our strategic reserve for the twenty-first century.’

The Murmansk Brigades will be Moscow’s minimum permanent Arctic force,
but Russia demonstrated its full cold-weather fighting ability in 2014
with an exercise that involved 155,000 men and thousands of tanks, jets
and ships. The Russian Defence Ministry said it was bigger than
exercises it had carried out during the Cold War.

During the war games Russian troops were tasked with repelling an
invasion by a foreign power named ‘Missouri’, which clearly signified
the USA. The scenario was that ‘Missouri’ troops had landed in Chukotka,
Kamchatka, the Kuril Islands and Sakhalin in support of an unnamed Asian
power which had already clashed with Russia. The unnamed power was
Japan, and the scenario’s conflict was provoked by a territorial dispute
said by analysts to be over the South Kuril Islands. The military
display of intent was then underlined politically when President Putin
for the first time added the Arctic region as a sphere of Russian
influence in its official foreign policy doctrine.

Despite Russia’s shrinking economic power, resulting in budget cuts in
many government departments, its defence budget has increased and this
is partially to pay for the boost in Arctic military muscle taking place
between now and 2020. Moscow has plans for the future, infrastructure
<span id="chapter10.html#page_233"></span>from the past and the
advantage of location. As Melissa Bert, a US Coast Guard captain, told
the Center for International and Strategic Studies in Washington, DC:
‘They have cities in the Arctic, we only have villages.’

All this is, in many ways, a continuation, or at least a resurrection,
of Russia’s Cold War Arctic policies. The Russians know that NATO can
bottle up their Baltic Fleet by blockading the Skagerrak Strait. This
potential blockade is complicated by the fact that up in the Arctic
their Northern Fleet has only 180 miles of open water from the Kola
coastline until it hits the Arctic ice pack. From this narrow corridor
it must also come down through the Norwegian Sea and then run the
potential gauntlet of the GIUK (Greenland, Iceland and the UK) gap to
reach the Atlantic Ocean. During the Cold War the area was known by NATO
as the ‘Kill Zone’, as this was where NATO’s planes, ships and
submarines expected to catch the Soviet fleet.

Fast forward to the New Cold War and the strategies remain the same,
even if now the Americans have withdrawn their forces from their NATO
ally Iceland. Iceland has no armed forces of its own and the American
withdrawal was described by the Icelandic government as ‘short-sighted’.
In a speech to the Swedish Atlantic Council, Iceland’s Justice Minister
Björn Bjarnason said: ‘A certain military presence should be maintained
in the region, sending a signal about a nation’s interests and ambitions
in a given area, since a military vacuum could be misinterpreted as a
lack of national interest and priority.’

However, for at least a decade now it has been clear that the Arctic is
a priority for the Russians in a way it is not for the Americans. This
is reflected in the degree of attention given to the region by both
countries, or in the case of the USA, its relative inattention since the
collapse of the Soviet Union.

It takes up to $1 billion and ten years to build an icebreaker. Russia
is clearly the leading Arctic power with the largest fleet of
icebreakers in the world, thirty-two in total, according to the US
Coastguard Review <span id="chapter10.html#page_234"></span>of 2013. Six
of those are nuclear-powered, the only such versions in the world, and
Russia also plans to launch the world’s most powerful icebreaker by
2018. It will be able to smash through ice more than 10 feet deep and
tow oil tankers with a displacement of up to 70,000 tons through the ice
fields.

By contrast, the United States has a fleet of one functioning heavy
icebreaker, the USS *Polar Star*, down from the eight it possessed in
the 1960s, and has no plans to build another. In 2012 it had to rely on
a Russian ship to resupply its research base in Antarctica, which was a
triumph for great power co-operation but simultaneously a demonstration
of how far behind the USA has fallen. No other nation presents a
challenge either: Canada has six icebreakers and is building a new one,
Finland has eight, Sweden seven and Denmark four. China, Germany and
Norway have one each.

The USA has another problem. It has not ratified the UNCLOS treaty,
effectively ceding 200,000 square miles of undersea territory in the
Arctic as it has not staked a claim for an EEZ.

Nevertheless, it is in dispute with Canada over potential offshore oil
rights and access to the waters in the Canadian archipelago. Canada says
they are an ‘internal waterway’, while the USA says they are a strait
for international navigation not governed by Canadian law. In 1985 the
USA sent an icebreaker through the waters without informing Canada in
advance, causing a furious row to break out between the two neighbours,
whose relationship is simultaneously friendly and prickly.

The USA is also in dispute with Russia over the Bering Sea, Arctic Ocean
and northern Pacific. A 1990 Maritime Boundary Agreement was signed with
the then Soviet Union in which Moscow ceded a fishing region. However,
following the break-up of the Soviet Union, the Russian parliament
refuses to ratify the agreement. The area is treated by both sides as
being under US sovereignty, but the Russians reserve the right to return
to this issue.

<span id="chapter10.html#page_235"></span>Other disputes include that
between Canada and Denmark over Hans Island, located in the Nares
Strait, which separates Greenland from Ellesmere Island. Greenland, with
its population of 56,000 people, has self-government but remains under
Danish sovereignty. A 1953 agreement between Denmark and Canada left the
island still in dispute, and since then both countries have taken the
trouble to sail to it and plant their national flags on it.

All the sovereignty issues stem from the same desires and fears – the
desire to safeguard routes for military and commercial shipping, the
desire to own the natural riches of the region, and the fear that others
may gain where you lose. Until recently the riches were theoretical, but
the melting ice has made the theoretical probable, and in some cases
certain.

The melting of the ice changes the geography and the stakes. The Arctic
states and the giant energy firms now have decisions to make about how
they deal with these changes and how much attention they pay to the
environment and the peoples of the Arctic. The hunger for energy
suggests the race is inevitable in what some Arctic specialists have
called the ‘New Great Game’. There are going to be a lot more ships in
the High North, a lot more oil rigs and gas platforms – in fact, a lot
more of everything. The Russians not only have their nuclear-powered
icebreakers, but are even considering building a floating nuclear power
plant capable of withstanding the crushing weight of ten feet of ice.

However, there are differences between this situation and the ‘Scramble
for Africa’ in the nineteenth century or the machinations of the great
powers in the Middle East, India and Afghanistan in the original Great
Game. This race has rules, a formula and a forum for decision-making.
The Arctic Council is composed of mature countries, most of them
democratic to a greater or lesser degree. The international laws
regulating territorial disputes, environmental pollution, laws of the
sea and treatment of minority peoples are in place. Most of the
territory <span id="chapter10.html#page_236"></span>in dispute has not
been conquered through nineteenth-century imperialism or by nation
states at war with each other.

The Arctic states know that theirs is a tough neighbourhood, not so much
because of warring factions but because of the challenges presented by
its geography. There are five and a half million square miles of ocean
up in the Arctic; they can be dark, dangerous and deadly. It is not a
good place to be without friends. They know that for anyone to succeed
in the region they may need to co-operate, especially on issues such as
fishing stocks, smuggling, terrorism, search and rescue and
environmental disasters.

It is plausible that a row over fishing rights could escalate into
something more serious, given that the UK and Iceland almost came to
blows during the ‘Cod Wars’ of the 1950s and 1970s. Smuggling occurs
wherever there are transit routes, and there is no reason to believe the
Arctic will be any different; but policing it will be difficult due to
the conditions there. And as more commercial vessels and cruise ships
head into the area, the search and rescue and anti-terrorism
capabilities of the Arctic nations will need to grow accordingly, as
will their capacity to react to an environmental disaster in
increasingly crowded waters. In 1965 the icebreaker *Lenin* had an
accident in its reactor whilst at sea. After its return to shore parts
of the reactor were cut out and, along with damaged fuel, placed in a
concrete container with a steel liner which was then dumped into the
sea. Such incidents are likely to occur more frequently as the Arctic
opens up, but they will remain difficult to manage.

Perhaps the Arctic will turn out to be just another battleground for the
nation states – after all, wars are started by fear of the other as well
as by greed; but the Arctic is different, and so perhaps how it is dealt
with will be different. In the film *Kalifornia* Brad Pitt’s character
says, ‘The cold makes people stupid and that’s a fact.’ It’s not, and it
doesn’t have to be that way.

<span id="conclu.html"></span>

<span id="conclu.html#page_237"></span>**CONCLUSION** []
-----------------------------------------------------

 

<span class="big">W</span><small>E FINISHED AT THE TOP OF THE WORLD AND
SO THE ONLY WAY</small> is up.

The final frontier has always called out to our imagination, but ours is
the age in which humanity has lived the dream and pushed out into space,
a millimetre into infinity, on our way to the future. Humanity’s
restless spirit ensures that our boundaries are not confined to what
Carl Sagan famously called the ‘Pale Blue Dot’.

But we must come back down to earth, sometimes with a bump, because we
have neither conquered our own geography yet, nor our propensity to
compete for it.

Geography has always been a prison of sorts – one that defines what a
nation is or can be, and one from which our world leaders have often
struggled to break free.

Russia is probably the clearest example, naturally expanding from the
small region of flatland it controlled until its heartland covered a
huge space ringed mostly by mountains and the sea – with just one
vulnerable point across the North European Plain. If the Russian leaders
wanted to create a great nation, which they did, then they had little
choice as to what to do about that weak spot. Likewise, in Europe no
conscious decision was made to become a huge trading area; the long,
level networks of rivers made it possible, and to an extent inevitable,
over the course of millennia.

<span id="conclu.html#page_238"></span>As the twenty-first century
progresses, the geographical factors that have helped determine our
history will mostly continue to determine our future: a century from
now, Russia will still be looking anxiously westward across what will
remain flatland. India and China will still be separated by the
Himalayas. They may eventually come into conflict with each other, but
if that does happen, then geography will determine the nature of the
fight: either they will need to develop technology to allow a huge
military force to cross over the mountains, or, if that remains
impossible and neither side wants to descend into nuclear war, to
confront each other at sea. Florida will continue to guard the exit of
and entrance to the Gulf of Mexico. It is the Gulf’s location that is
key, not who controls it. To take an extreme and unlikely scenario:
imagine a majority Hispanic Florida has seceded from the USA and allied
itself with Cuba and Mexico. This would alter only the dynamics of who
controlled the Gulf, not the importance of the location.

Of course geography does not dictate the course of all events. Great
ideas and great leaders are part of the push and pull of history. But
they must all operate within the confines of geography. The leaders of
Bangladesh might dream of preventing the waters from flooding up the Bay
of Bengal, but they know that 80 per cent of the country is on a flood
plain and cannot be moved. It is a point the Scandinavian and English
leader King Canute made to his sycophantic courtiers in the eleventh
century, when ordering the waves to retreat: nature, or God, was greater
than any man. In Bangladesh all that can be done is to react to the
realities of nature: build more flood defences, and hope that the
computer modelling of rising waters due to global warming is overstated.

New geographical realities such as climate change present new
opportunities and challenges. Global warming may well result in the mass
movement of people. If the Maldives, and many other islands, really are
destined to be lost to the waves, the impact will not just be on those
leaving before it is too late but also upon the countries to which they
flee. <span id="conclu.html#page_239"></span>If the flooding of
Bangladesh becomes worse, the future of the country and its 160 million
people is dire; if the water levels rise much higher, this impoverished
country may go under. And if the desertification of the lands just below
the Sahel continues, then wars such as the one in Darfur, Sudan
(partially caused by the desert encroaching on nomads in the north,
which in turn pushed them southwards towards the Fur people), will
intensify and spread.

Water wars are another potential problem. Even if stable democracies
were to emerge in the Middle East in the coming decades, if the waters
of the Murat River, which rises in Turkey before feeding the Euphrates,
were to diminish considerably, then the dams Turkey would have to build
to protect its own source of life could quite easily be the cause of war
with Syria and Iraq downstream.

Looking further ahead, as we continue to break out of the prison of our
geography into the universe, the political struggles will persist in
space, at least for the foreseeable future.

A human being first burst through the top layer of the stratosphere in
1961 when twenty-seven-year-old Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin made it
into space aboard *Vostok 1*. It is a sad reflection on humanity that
the name of a fellow Russian called Kalashnikov is far better known.

Gagarin, Buzz Aldrin and many others are the descendants of Marco Polo
and Christopher Columbus, pioneers who pushed the boundaries and who
changed the world in ways they could not have imagined in their own
lifetimes. Whether for better or worse is not the point; they discovered
new opportunities and new spaces in which peoples would compete to make
the most of what nature had put there. It will take generations, but in
space, too, we will plant our flags, ‘conquer’ territory, claim ground
and overcome the barriers the universe puts in our way.

There are now about 1,100 functioning satellites in space, and at least
2,000 non-functioning ones. The Russians and Americans launched
approximately 2,400 of the total, about 100 have come from Japan and a
<span id="conclu.html#page_240"></span>similar number from China,
followed by a host of other countries with far fewer. Below them are the
space stations, where for the first time people live and work
semi-permanently outside the confines of earth’s gravity. Further on, at
least five American flags are thought to be still standing on the
surface of the moon, and further still, much further, our machines have
made it out past Mars and Jupiter, some heading way beyond what we can
see and are trying to understand.

It is tempting to think of our endeavours in space as linking humanity
to a collective and co-operative future. But first there will continue
to be competition for supremacy in outer space. The satellites are not
just there to beam back our TV pictures, or to predict the weather: they
also spy on other countries, to see who is moving where and with what.
In addition, America and China are engaged in developing laser
technology, which can be used as weapons, and both seek to ensure that
they have a missile system that can operate in space and nullify the
competition’s version. Many of the technologically advanced nations are
now making preparations in case they need to fight in space.

When we are reaching for the stars, the challenges ahead are such that
we will perhaps have to come together to meet them: to travel the
universe not as Russians, Americans or Chinese but as representatives of
humanity. But so far, although we have broken free from the shackles of
gravity, we are still imprisoned in our own minds, confined by our
suspicion of the ‘other’, and thus our primal competition for resources.
There is a long way to go.

<span id="biblo.html"></span>

<span id="biblo.html#page_241"></span>**BIBLIOGRAPHY** []
------------------------------------------------------

 

**General references**

Diamond, Jared, *Guns, Germs, and Steel* (New York: W. W. Norton, 2005)

Dodds, Klaus, *Geopolitics: A Very Short Introduction* (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2007)

Ikenberry, G. John, ‘The Illusion of Geopolitics’, *Foreign Affairs*
(May/June 2014)

Keegan, John, *Atlas of World War Two* (London: Harper Collins, 2006)

Mackinder, Halford John, ‘The Geographical Pivot of History’, *The
Geographical Society*, Vol. 23, No. 4 (April 1904), 421–37

Mackinder, Halford John, *Democratic Ideals and Reality*, 1919

Mead, Walter Russell, ‘The Return of Geopolitics’, *Foreign Affairs*
(May/June 2014)

Monmonier, M., *How to Lie with Maps* (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1996)

Parry, Chris, *Super Highway: Sea Power in the 21st Century* (London:
Elliott & Thompson, 2014)

Pickles, John, *A History of Spaces: Cartographic Reason, Mapping and
the Geo-Coded World* (London: Routledge, 2004)

<span id="biblo.html#page_242"></span>Roberts, S., Secor, A., and
Sparke, M., ‘Neoliberal Geopolitics’, *Antipode*, Vol. 35, No. 5
(November 2003), 886–97.

*The Times Atlas of World History* (London: Times Books, 2000)

*The Times Comprehensive Atlas of The World*, 12th edition (London:
Times Books, 2007)

Weigley, Russell F., *The American Way of War* (Bloomington, IN: Indiana
University Press, 1973)

[**Russia**](#chapter01.html)

Eberstadt, Nicholas, ‘Russia’s Peacetime Demographic Crisis: Dimensions,
Causes, Implications’ (National Bureau of Asian Research, 2010)

Kennan, George F., ‘The Sources of Soviet Conduct’, *Foreign Affairs*
(July 1947)

‘Russia’s accusations – setting the record straight’, NATO Fact Sheet
(April 2014)

[**China**](#chapter02.html)

Beardson, Timothy, *Stumbling Giant: The Threats to China’s Future*,
(New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2013)

Boehm, Dana Carver, ‘China’s Failed War on Terror: Fanning the Flames of
Uighur Separatist Violence’, *Berkley Journal of Middle Eastern and
Islamic Law*, Vol. 2, No. 1:3 (2009)

De Crespigny, Rafe, *China This Century* (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1992)

Kaplan, Robert D., *The Revenge of Geography* (London: Random House,
2012)

Lewis, Martin, ‘East Asia’, Stanford University Global Geopolitics
Lectures, East Asia (15 January 2008)

Shaughnessy, Edward L. (ed.), *China: Empire and Civilization* (London:
Duncan Baird Publishers, 2005)

<span id="biblo.html#page_243"></span>Theroux, Paul, *Riding the Iron
Rooster* (London: Hamish Hamilton, 1988)

[**USA**](#chapter03.html)

Commager, S., *Documents of American History Volume 1: to 1898* (10th
Edition) (New Jersey: Prentice Hall, 1988)

Kagan, Robert, *Dangerous Nation: America and the World, 1600–1898*
(London: Atlantic Books, 2006)

Pei, Minxin, ‘How America and China See Each Other’, *Foreign Affairs*
(March/April 2014)

‘The Geopolitics of the United States, Part 1: The Inevitable Empire’,
[Stratfor.com](http://Stratfor.com), 4 July 2014
(<https://www.stratfor.com/analysis/geopolitics-united-states-part-1-inevitable-empire>)

US Department of State, ‘Rise to World Power, 1867–1913’, A Short
History of the Department of State
(history.state.gov/departmenthistory/short-history)

[**Africa**](#chapter05.html)

Bloom, David E. and Sachs, Jeffrey D., ‘Geography, Demography, and
Economic Growth in Africa’, Harvard Institute for International
Development, Harvard University (October 1998)

Chaves, Isaías, Engerman, Stanley, L. and Robinson, James, A.,
‘Reinventing the Wheel: The Economic Benefits of Wheeled Transportation
in Early Colonial British West Africa’, February 2012
(<http://scholar.harvard.edu/files/jrobinson/files/the_wheel_in_africa_february_2012.pdf>)

Kasperson, Roger E. and Minghi, Julian V., *The Structure of Political
Geography* (New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 2011)

<span id="biblo.html#page_244"></span>[**Western
Europe**](#chapter04.html)

Kagan, Robert, *Of Paradise and Power* (New York: Random House, 2003)

Ottens, Nick, ‘ “Too Big for Europe”: The Recurring German Problem’,
*Atlantic Sentinel*, 28 April 2014

Speck, Ulrich, ‘Power and Purpose: German Foreign Policy at a
Crossroads’, 3 November 2014
(<http://carnegieeurope.eu/publications/?fa=57167>)

Simon, Luis and Rogers, James, ‘The Return of European Geopolitics? All
roads run through London’, *The RUSI Journal*, Vol. 155, No. 3 (2010),
57–63

Turchin, Peter, *War and Peace and War* (London: Plume Books, 2007)

[**Middle East**](#chapter06.html)

Fisher, Max, ‘40 Maps Which Explain The Middle East’,
[Vox.com](http://Vox.com), 5 May 2014
(<http://www.vox.com/a/maps-explain-the-middle-east>)

Malinowski, Jon C. (ed.), ‘Iraq: A Geography’, United States Military
Academy, West Point, New York, 2004
(<http://www.usma.edu/gene/SiteAssets/SitePages/Publications/Iraq%20A%20Geography.pdf?Mobile=1>)

[**India and Pakistan**](#chapter07.html)

French, Patrick, *India: A Portrait* (London: Allen Lane, 2011)

‘Geography of India’, [MapsofIndia.com](http://MapsofIndia.com), 12
November 2014
([http://www.mapsofindia.com/geography/](http://www.mapsofindia.com/geography))

Institute for the Study of War, ‘Pakistan and Afghanistan’ (2009)

Kreft, Dr. Heinrich, ‘The Geopolitical Importance of Pakistan’, Institut
für Strategie- Politik- Sicherheits- und Wirtschaftsberatung (ISPSW), 15
February 2008

Musharraf, Pervez, *In The Line Of Fire: A Memoir* (New York: Free
Press, 2008)

<span id="biblo.html#page_245"></span>[**Latin
America**](#chapter09.html)

Keen, Benjamin and Haynes, Keith, *A History of Latin America, Volume 1*
(Wadsworth: Cengage Learning, 2012)

World Economic Forum on Latin America 2011
(<http://www.weforum.org/events/world-economic-forum-latin-america-2011>)

Zovatto, Daniel, ‘Elections in the Southern Cone: Citizens Chose
Continuity’, Brookings, 30 October 2014
(<http://www.brookings.edu/research/opinions/2014/10/30-democracy-alternation-latin-america-zovatto>)

[**Korea and Japan**](#chapter08.html)

Chang, Gordon G., *Nuclear Showdown: North Korea Takes On The World*
(London: Hutchinson, 2006)

Oberdorfer, Don, *The Two Koreas* (New York: Basic Books, 2001)

Seung-young Kim, *American Diplomacy and Strategy Toward Korea and
Northeast Asia 1882–1950 and After* (London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2009)

[**Arctic**](#chapter10.html)

Bjarnason, Björn, ‘Climate Change and Iceland’s Role in North Atlantic
Security’ (speech), Belfer Center, John F. Kennedy School of Government,
Harvard, 26 November 2007

Conant, Eve, ‘Breaking the Ice: Russian Nuclear-Powered Ice-Breakers’,
Scientific American blog, 8 September 2012
(<http://blogs.scientificamerican.com/guest-blog/2012/09/08/breaking-the-ice>/)

Grydehøj, Anne, Grydehøj, Adam and Akrén, Maria, ‘The Globalization of
the Arctic: Negotiating Sovereignty and Building Communities in
Svalbard, Norway’, *Island Studies Journal* Vol. 7, No. 1 (2012), 99–119

United Nations, ‘Part V: Exclusive Economic Zone’, UNCLOS Treaty
(<http://www.un.org/depts/los/convention_agreements/texts/unclos/part5.htm>)

Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, ‘The Arctic: Exploration Timeline,
Polar Discovery’, 2009
(<http://polardiscovery.whoi.edu/arctic/330.html>)

<span id="ack.html"></span>

<span id="ack.html#page_246"></span><span id="ack.html#page_247"></span>**ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS** []
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

 

Many thanks to all those who freely gave of their time, advice and
encouragement.

I would like to thank my wife Joanna for her patience and natural
spellcheck abilities, Pippa Crane and Jennie Condell at Elliott and
Thompson for giving shape and direction to my geographic wanderings, and
Ollie Dewis for her encouragement and ideas.

I am grateful to the following for casting their experienced eyes over
sections of the book and would like to reiterate that any errors
contained therein are my doing and responsibility: James Richards
(former official Chinese interpreter to the UK government, Chairman of
China Association), Professor James D. Boys (Visiting Senior Research
Fellow, Kings College London), David Slinn (former UK Ambassador to
North Korea), Joel Richards MA (South American specialist), Kelvin
O’Shea (Sky News), Tim Miller (Sky News), Jaksa Scekic (Reuters
Belgrade) and Aleksander Vasca (Reuters Belgrade).

Also, thanks to those serving members of governments and the civil
service who kindly gave me their expertise, but preferred it to be used
without attribution.

<span id="index.html"></span>

<span id="index.html#page_248"></span><span id="index.html#page_249"></span>**INDEX** []
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

 

**A**

Abe of Japan, Prime Minister [50](#chapter02.html#page_50)

Abkhazia [93](#chapter04.html#page_93)

Adams, Henry [59](#chapter03.html#page_59)

Adams, John Quincy [60](#chapter03.html#page_60)

Addis Ababa [108](#chapter05.html#page_108)

Aegean Sea [82–3](#chapter04.html#page_82)

Afghanistan [xii–xiii](#intro.html#page_xii),
[11](#chapter01.html#page_11), [37](#chapter02.html#page_37),
[41](#chapter02.html#page_41), [72](#chapter03.html#page_72),
[90](#chapter04.html#page_90), [144](#chapter06.html#page_144),
[159](#chapter07.html#page_159), [162](#chapter07.html#page_162),
[165–6](#chapter07.html#page_165), [168](#chapter07.html#page_168),
[169–71](#chapter07.html#page_169), [172](#chapter07.html#page_172)

Africa [xiv](#intro.html#page_xiv), [25](#chapter01.html#page_25),
[50](#chapter02.html#page_50), [72](#chapter03.html#page_72)

agriculture [100](#chapter05.html#page_100),
[115](#chapter05.html#page_115)

Angola [100](#chapter05.html#page_100), [105](#chapter05.html#page_105),
[106](#chapter05.html#page_106), [111–12](#chapter05.html#page_111),
[113–14](#chapter05.html#page_113), [116](#chapter05.html#page_116)

Arab influence [99](#chapter05.html#page_99),
[102](#chapter05.html#page_102)

China and [50](#chapter02.html#page_50),
[106](#chapter05.html#page_106), [108](#chapter05.html#page_108),
[111](#chapter05.html#page_111), [112–16](#chapter05.html#page_112)

climate and terrain [98](#chapter05.html#page_98),
[99–100](#chapter05.html#page_99), [102](#chapter05.html#page_102),
[115](#chapter05.html#page_115)

diseases [100](#chapter05.html#page_100),
[115](#chapter05.html#page_115)

early empires [101](#chapter05.html#page_101)

energy resources [107](#chapter05.html#page_107),
[108–10](#chapter05.html#page_108), [111](#chapter05.html#page_111),
[112–13](#chapter05.html#page_112), [117](#chapter05.html#page_117)

European influence [102–3](#chapter05.html#page_102)

extents and borders [99–100](#chapter05.html#page_99),
[103](#chapter05.html#page_103), [111](#chapter05.html#page_111)

internal conflicts [103–4](#chapter05.html#page_103),
[106–12](#chapter05.html#page_106), [117](#chapter05.html#page_117)

isolation [98](#chapter05.html#page_98), [101](#chapter05.html#page_101)

military forces [108](#chapter05.html#page_108),
[109](#chapter05.html#page_109), [110](#chapter05.html#page_110),
[111](#chapter05.html#page_111), [115](#chapter05.html#page_115),
[116](#chapter05.html#page_116)

mineral resources [105–6](#chapter05.html#page_105),
[107](#chapter05.html#page_107), [112](#chapter05.html#page_112),
[114](#chapter05.html#page_114), [115](#chapter05.html#page_115),
[116–17](#chapter05.html#page_116)

North [24](#chapter01.html#page_24), [72](#chapter03.html#page_72),
[81](#chapter04.html#page_81)

rivers [100–1](#chapter05.html#page_100),
[102](#chapter05.html#page_102), [107](#chapter05.html#page_107),
[117](#chapter05.html#page_117)

size and population [98–9](#chapter05.html#page_98),
[105](#chapter05.html#page_105), [108](#chapter05.html#page_108),
[109](#chapter05.html#page_109), [111](#chapter05.html#page_111),
[115](#chapter05.html#page_115), [118](#chapter05.html#page_118)

slavery [102](#chapter05.html#page_102)

South [100](#chapter05.html#page_100), [111](#chapter05.html#page_111),
[115–17](#chapter05.html#page_115)

trading links [101–2](#chapter05.html#page_101),
[106](#chapter05.html#page_106), [110](#chapter05.html#page_110),
[114](#chapter05.html#page_114), [115](#chapter05.html#page_115),
[117](#chapter05.html#page_117)

*see also* **individual countries by name**

African National Congress (ANC) [116](#chapter05.html#page_116)

Aksai Chin [38](#chapter02.html#page_38)

al-Bashir, Omar [114](#chapter05.html#page_114)

Al Qaeda [xii](#intro.html#page_xii), [42](#chapter02.html#page_42),
[132–3](#chapter06.html#page_132), [135](#chapter06.html#page_135),
[166–7](#chapter07.html#page_166), [168](#chapter07.html#page_168),
[170](#chapter07.html#page_170), [172](#chapter07.html#page_172)

al-Qaradawi, Yusuf [150](#chapter06.html#page_150)

Alaska [62–3](#chapter03.html#page_62), [224](#chapter10.html#page_224)

Alawites [125](#chapter06.html#page_125),
[131–2](#chapter06.html#page_131), [144](#chapter06.html#page_144)

Albania [13](#chapter01.html#page_13), [86](#chapter04.html#page_86)

Algeria [123](#chapter06.html#page_123)

Alps Mountains [79](#chapter04.html#page_79)

Amazon River [202](#chapter09.html#page_202),
[213](#chapter09.html#page_213)

American Revolutionary War (1775–83) [57](#chapter03.html#page_57)

Amundsen, Roald [226](#chapter10.html#page_226)

Andes Mountains [202](#chapter09.html#page_202)

Angola [100](#chapter05.html#page_100), [105](#chapter05.html#page_105),
[106](#chapter05.html#page_106), [111–12](#chapter05.html#page_111),
[113–14](#chapter05.html#page_113), [116](#chapter05.html#page_116)

Antarctica [219](#chapter09.html#page_219)

Appalachian Mountains [56–7](#chapter03.html#page_56)

Arab-Israeli War [130](#chapter06.html#page_130)

Arabian Desert [123](#chapter06.html#page_123)

Arabian Peninsula [129](#chapter06.html#page_129)

Arabian Sea [157](#chapter07.html#page_157),
[164](#chapter07.html#page_164)

Argentina [200](#chapter09.html#page_200),
[201](#chapter09.html#page_201), [203](#chapter09.html#page_203),
[204](#chapter09.html#page_204), [211](#chapter09.html#page_211),
[215–19](#chapter09.html#page_215)

Armenia [12](#chapter01.html#page_12), [22](#chapter01.html#page_22)

Armitage, Richard [168–9](#chapter07.html#page_168)

Arctic [xiii](#intro.html#page_xiii), [xiv](#intro.html#page_xiv),
[25](#chapter01.html#page_25), [92](#chapter04.html#page_92)

Arctic Council [230](#chapter10.html#page_230),
[235](#chapter10.html#page_235)

claims to Sovereignty [231–6](#chapter10.html#page_231)

expeditions [225–7](#chapter10.html#page_225)

extent of region [224–5](#chapter10.html#page_224)

global warming [224–5](#chapter10.html#page_224),
[227–8](#chapter10.html#page_227)

icebreakers [233–4](#chapter10.html#page_233)

natural resources [224](#chapter10.html#page_224),
[229–30](#chapter10.html#page_229), [235](#chapter10.html#page_235)

Northern Sea Route [229](#chapter10.html#page_229)

Northwest Passage [225–6](#chapter10.html#page_225),
[228–9](#chapter10.html#page_228)

<span id="index.html#page_250"></span>Russia and the
[224](#chapter10.html#page_224), [229](#chapter10.html#page_229),
[230](#chapter10.html#page_230), [231–4](#chapter10.html#page_231)

trading links [229](#chapter10.html#page_229)

United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
[230](#chapter10.html#page_230), [234](#chapter10.html#page_234)

Arunachal Pradesh [38](#chapter02.html#page_38),
[173–4](#chapter07.html#page_173)

Asia [5–6](#chapter01.html#page_5), [9–10](#chapter01.html#page_9)

*see also* **individual countries by name**

Assad, Bashar [131](#chapter06.html#page_131),
[132](#chapter06.html#page_132)

Assad, Hafez [131–2](#chapter06.html#page_131)

Assam [174](#chapter07.html#page_174)

Atlantic Ocean [14](#chapter01.html#page_14),
[57](#chapter03.html#page_57), [65](#chapter03.html#page_65),
[79](#chapter04.html#page_79), [81](#chapter04.html#page_81),
[88](#chapter04.html#page_88), [92](#chapter04.html#page_92),
[98](#chapter05.html#page_98), [101](#chapter05.html#page_101),
[147](#chapter06.html#page_147), [201](#chapter09.html#page_201)

Austro-Hungarian Empire [80](#chapter04.html#page_80)

Australia [65](#chapter03.html#page_65), [68](#chapter03.html#page_68)

Austria [23](#chapter01.html#page_23)

Azerbaijan [12](#chapter01.html#page_12)

**B**

Bahrain [67](#chapter03.html#page_67), [71](#chapter03.html#page_71)

Balboa, Vasco Núñez de [209](#chapter09.html#page_209)

Balkans [xi–xii](#intro.html#page_xi), [86](#chapter04.html#page_86)

Baltic Sea [15](#chapter01.html#page_15), [20](#chapter01.html#page_20),
[93](#chapter04.html#page_93)

Baltic States [8](#chapter01.html#page_8),
[18](#chapter01.html#page_18), [19–20](#chapter01.html#page_19),
[83](#chapter04.html#page_83)

Baluchistan [162–3](#chapter07.html#page_162)

Bangladesh [49](#chapter02.html#page_49),
[157](#chapter07.html#page_157), [158](#chapter07.html#page_158),
[159](#chapter07.html#page_159), [238–9](#conclu.html#page_238)

Bay of Bengal [49](#chapter02.html#page_49),
[157](#chapter07.html#page_157)

Belarus [12](#chapter01.html#page_12)

Belgium [92](#chapter04.html#page_92), [105](#chapter05.html#page_105)

Belize [204](#chapter09.html#page_204)

Berlin Wall [6](#chapter01.html#page_6)

Bessarabia *see* Moldova

Bhutan [157](#chapter07.html#page_157), [174](#chapter07.html#page_174)

Bhutto, Benazir [168](#chapter07.html#page_168)

*Bild* newspaper [94](#chapter04.html#page_94)

bin Laden, Osama [170](#chapter07.html#page_170)

Bjarnason, Björn [233](#chapter10.html#page_233)

Black Sea [14](#chapter01.html#page_14), [15](#chapter01.html#page_15),
[20](#chapter01.html#page_20), [147](#chapter06.html#page_147)

Boko Haram [110–11](#chapter05.html#page_110)

Bolívar, Simón [203](#chapter09.html#page_203)

Bolivia [203–4](#chapter09.html#page_203)

Bosporus Strait [14](#chapter01.html#page_14),
[15](#chapter01.html#page_15), [147](#chapter06.html#page_147)

Brahmaputra River [158](#chapter07.html#page_158)

Brazil [73](#chapter03.html#page_73), [201](#chapter09.html#page_201),
[202](#chapter09.html#page_202), [203](#chapter09.html#page_203),
[211](#chapter09.html#page_211), [212–16](#chapter09.html#page_212),
[217](#chapter09.html#page_217)

BRICS [216](#chapter09.html#page_216)

Britain [83](#chapter04.html#page_83), [85](#chapter04.html#page_85),
[88](#chapter04.html#page_88), [91–2](#chapter04.html#page_91),
[109](#chapter05.html#page_109)

Afghanistan and [169–70](#chapter07.html#page_169)

Belize and [204](#chapter09.html#page_204)

Falkland Islands [216](#chapter09.html#page_216),
[218–19](#chapter09.html#page_218)

imperial powers [34](#chapter02.html#page_34),
[35](#chapter02.html#page_35), [92](#chapter04.html#page_92),
[157–9](#chapter07.html#page_157)

India and [157–9](#chapter07.html#page_157)

Israel/Palestine and [137](#chapter06.html#page_137)

Middle East and [123–4](#chapter06.html#page_123),
[128–9](#chapter06.html#page_128), [135](#chapter06.html#page_135),
[169](#chapter07.html#page_169)

military forces [64](#chapter03.html#page_64),
[88](#chapter04.html#page_88), [92](#chapter04.html#page_92)

USA and [58](#chapter03.html#page_58), [64](#chapter03.html#page_64),
[65](#chapter03.html#page_65), [218](#chapter09.html#page_218)

Brunei [48](#chapter02.html#page_48)

Bulgaria [13](#chapter01.html#page_13), [23](#chapter01.html#page_23),
[24](#chapter01.html#page_24), [79](#chapter04.html#page_79),
[86](#chapter04.html#page_86)

Burma [34](#chapter02.html#page_34), [37](#chapter02.html#page_37),
[49–50](#chapter02.html#page_49), [67](#chapter03.html#page_67),
[157](#chapter07.html#page_157), [174](#chapter07.html#page_174),
[175](#chapter07.html#page_175), [193](#chapter08.html#page_193)

Burundi [106](#chapter05.html#page_106),
[107](#chapter05.html#page_107), [116](#chapter05.html#page_116),
[117](#chapter05.html#page_117)

**C**

California Gold Rush [62](#chapter03.html#page_62)

Cameroon [110](#chapter05.html#page_110)

Canada [224](#chapter10.html#page_224), [230](#chapter10.html#page_230),
[231–2](#chapter10.html#page_231), [234](#chapter10.html#page_234),
[235](#chapter10.html#page_235)

Canadian Shield [57](#chapter03.html#page_57)

Cape of Good Hope [98–9](#chapter05.html#page_98)

Caribbean Sea [72](#chapter03.html#page_72),
[201](#chapter09.html#page_201)

Catalonia [79](#chapter04.html#page_79)

Catherine the Great [8](#chapter01.html#page_8),
[17](#chapter01.html#page_17)

Caucasus [11](#chapter01.html#page_11), [135](#chapter06.html#page_135),
[147](#chapter06.html#page_147)

Central African Republic [100](#chapter05.html#page_100),
[106](#chapter05.html#page_106)

Charles XII of Sweden, King [6](#chapter01.html#page_6)

Chechnya, Caucasus [11](#chapter01.html#page_11)

Chile [201](#chapter09.html#page_201), [202](#chapter09.html#page_202),
[203–4](#chapter09.html#page_203), [212](#chapter09.html#page_212)

China [x](#intro.html#page_x), [xiii–xiv](#intro.html#page_xiii),
[64](#chapter03.html#page_64), [234](#chapter10.html#page_234)

Africa and [50](#chapter02.html#page_50),
[106](#chapter05.html#page_106), [108](#chapter05.html#page_108),
[111](#chapter05.html#page_111), [112–16](#chapter05.html#page_112)

agriculture [31–2](#chapter02.html#page_31),
[43](#chapter02.html#page_43)

Air Defence Identification Zone [46](#chapter02.html#page_46),
[47](#chapter02.html#page_47), [69–70](#chapter03.html#page_69)

archipelagos [44–6](#chapter02.html#page_44),
[48](#chapter02.html#page_48)

Arctic and [230](#chapter10.html#page_230)

Burma and [49–50](#chapter02.html#page_49),
[67](#chapter03.html#page_67)

Communist Party [34](#chapter02.html#page_34),
[35](#chapter02.html#page_35), [38](#chapter02.html#page_38),
[39](#chapter02.html#page_39), [42–3](#chapter02.html#page_42)

early history [31–3](#chapter02.html#page_31)

energy resources [46](#chapter02.html#page_46),
[48](#chapter02.html#page_48), [111](#chapter05.html#page_111),
[162](#chapter07.html#page_162), [209](#chapter09.html#page_209)

extents and borders [31](#chapter02.html#page_31),
[32–3](#chapter02.html#page_32), [34](#chapter02.html#page_34),
[35–8](#chapter02.html#page_35), [40](#chapter02.html#page_40),
[50](#chapter02.html#page_50), [172](#chapter07.html#page_172)

Han Chinese [31](#chapter02.html#page_31),
[32](#chapter02.html#page_32), [33](#chapter02.html#page_33),
[36](#chapter02.html#page_36), [38](#chapter02.html#page_38),
[39–40](#chapter02.html#page_39), [41](#chapter02.html#page_41)

human rights perspective [42–3](#chapter02.html#page_42)

India and [37–8](#chapter02.html#page_37),
[41](#chapter02.html#page_41), [163](#chapter07.html#page_163),
[172–6](#chapter07.html#page_172), [238](#conclu.html#page_238)

industrialisation [31](#chapter02.html#page_31),
[43](#chapter02.html#page_43)

invasions of [33](#chapter02.html#page_33),
[34](#chapter02.html#page_34)

Japan and [34](#chapter02.html#page_34), [35](#chapter02.html#page_35),
[45–6](#chapter02.html#page_45), [189](#chapter08.html#page_189),
[191](#chapter08.html#page_191), [194](#chapter08.html#page_194),
[195–6](#chapter08.html#page_195)

Korea and [180–1](#chapter08.html#page_180),
[185](#chapter08.html#page_185), [188](#chapter08.html#page_188),
[192](#chapter08.html#page_192), [195](#chapter08.html#page_195)

Latin America and [209–11](#chapter09.html#page_209),
[212](#chapter09.html#page_212), [216](#chapter09.html#page_216)

Middle East and [151](#chapter06.html#page_151)

military forces [114](#chapter05.html#page_114),
[115](#chapter05.html#page_115), [163](#chapter07.html#page_163)

Mongol Empire and [33](#chapter02.html#page_33)

Navy [30–1](#chapter02.html#page_30), [37](#chapter02.html#page_37),
[43–4](#chapter02.html#page_43), [48](#chapter02.html#page_48),
[71](#chapter03.html#page_71), [175–6](#chapter07.html#page_175)

North China Plain ‘the heartland’ [31–2](#chapter02.html#page_31)

Pakistan and [162](#chapter07.html#page_162),
[176](#chapter07.html#page_176)

ports [49](#chapter02.html#page_49), [50](#chapter02.html#page_50)

Russia and [10](#chapter01.html#page_10), [25](#chapter01.html#page_25),
[34](#chapter02.html#page_34), [35](#chapter02.html#page_35),
[36](#chapter02.html#page_36)

Siberia and [10](#chapter01.html#page_10)

size and population [31](#chapter02.html#page_31),
[32](#chapter02.html#page_32), [34](#chapter02.html#page_34),
[36](#chapter02.html#page_36), [50–1](#chapter02.html#page_50),
[196](#chapter08.html#page_196)

space programme [240](#conclu.html#page_240)

Taiwan and [45](#chapter02.html#page_45),
[46–7](#chapter02.html#page_46), [70](#chapter03.html#page_70)

Tibet and [xv](#intro.html#page_xv), [32](#chapter02.html#page_32),
[35](#chapter02.html#page_35), [37](#chapter02.html#page_37),
[38–40](#chapter02.html#page_38), [42](#chapter02.html#page_42),
[163](#chapter07.html#page_163), [173](#chapter07.html#page_173),
[174](#chapter07.html#page_174)

trading links [33–4](#chapter02.html#page_33),
[36](#chapter02.html#page_36), [37](#chapter02.html#page_37),
[42](#chapter02.html#page_42), [47](#chapter02.html#page_47),
[48](#chapter02.html#page_48), [106](#chapter05.html#page_106),
[114](#chapter05.html#page_114), [175](#chapter07.html#page_175),
[181](#chapter08.html#page_181), [211](#chapter09.html#page_211),
[212](#chapter09.html#page_212), [216](#chapter09.html#page_216)

<span id="index.html#page_251"></span>USA and
[30](#chapter02.html#page_30), [44](#chapter02.html#page_44),
[46](#chapter02.html#page_46), [47](#chapter02.html#page_47),
[48–9](#chapter02.html#page_48), [66](#chapter03.html#page_66),
[67–70](#chapter03.html#page_67), [180](#chapter08.html#page_180),
[185](#chapter08.html#page_185), [195](#chapter08.html#page_195)

Vietnam and [37](#chapter02.html#page_37), [48](#chapter02.html#page_48)

Xinjiang [34](#chapter02.html#page_34), [39](#chapter02.html#page_39),
[40–2](#chapter02.html#page_40), [162](#chapter07.html#page_162)

Churchill, Winston [4–5](#chapter01.html#page_4)

Clinton, Hillary [68](#chapter03.html#page_68)

Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO)
[12](#chapter01.html#page_12)

Colombia [202](#chapter09.html#page_202),
[207](#chapter09.html#page_207), [212](#chapter09.html#page_212)

colonialism [xiv](#intro.html#page_xiv),
[103](#chapter05.html#page_103), [105](#chapter05.html#page_105),
[116](#chapter05.html#page_116), [132](#chapter06.html#page_132),
[157–8](#chapter07.html#page_157)

Communism

China [34](#chapter02.html#page_34), [35](#chapter02.html#page_35),
[38](#chapter02.html#page_38), [39](#chapter02.html#page_39),
[42–3](#chapter02.html#page_42)

Korea [183–4](#chapter08.html#page_183)

*see also* Russia/Soviet Union (USSR)

concrete [65](#chapter03.html#page_65), [67](#chapter03.html#page_67)

Congo [99–100](#chapter05.html#page_99)

*see also* Democratic Republic of Congo

Congo River [101](#chapter05.html#page_101)

Crimea [14](#chapter01.html#page_14), [15](#chapter01.html#page_15),
[16–17](#chapter01.html#page_16), [18](#chapter01.html#page_18),
[24](#chapter01.html#page_24), [90](#chapter04.html#page_90),
[93](#chapter04.html#page_93)

Crimean War [6](#chapter01.html#page_6), [21](#chapter01.html#page_21)

Croatia [79](#chapter04.html#page_79), [86](#chapter04.html#page_86)

Cyrenaica [104](#chapter05.html#page_104)

Cuba [63](#chapter03.html#page_63), [69](#chapter03.html#page_69),
[111](#chapter05.html#page_111), [180](#chapter08.html#page_180),
[238](#conclu.html#page_238)

Cuban Missile Crisis [63](#chapter03.html#page_63),
[69](#chapter03.html#page_69)

Cyprus [146–7](#chapter06.html#page_146)

Czech Republic [13](#chapter01.html#page_13),
[23](#chapter01.html#page_23), [24](#chapter01.html#page_24)

**D**

Dagestan, Caucasus [11](#chapter01.html#page_11)

Dalai Lama [38](#chapter02.html#page_38),
[163](#chapter07.html#page_163), [173](#chapter07.html#page_173)

Danube River [79–80](#chapter04.html#page_79)

Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) [104–6](#chapter05.html#page_104),
[112](#chapter05.html#page_112), [114](#chapter05.html#page_114),
[117](#chapter05.html#page_117)

Deng Xiaoping [35](#chapter02.html#page_35)

Denmark [15](#chapter01.html#page_15), [86](#chapter04.html#page_86),
[87](#chapter04.html#page_87), [230](#chapter10.html#page_230),
[232](#chapter10.html#page_232), [234](#chapter10.html#page_234),
[235](#chapter10.html#page_235)

Destroyers for Bases Agreement [64](#chapter03.html#page_64)

Diamond, Jared [98](#chapter05.html#page_98),
[100](#chapter05.html#page_100)

Dnieper River [7](#chapter01.html#page_7)

Dokdo/Takeshima Islands [190](#chapter08.html#page_190)

Dominican Republic [63](#chapter03.html#page_63)

drug trafficking [206–8](#chapter09.html#page_206)

Durand, Mortimer [166](#chapter07.html#page_166)

**E**

East African Community (EAC) [116](#chapter05.html#page_116)

East China Sea [37](#chapter02.html#page_37),
[46](#chapter02.html#page_46), [65](#chapter03.html#page_65),
[189](#chapter08.html#page_189), [195](#chapter08.html#page_195)

East Coast Plain [56–7](#chapter03.html#page_56)

East Turkestan *see* Xinjiang

Ecuador [202](#chapter09.html#page_202),
[204](#chapter09.html#page_204), [211](#chapter09.html#page_211),
[215](#chapter09.html#page_215)

Egypt [107–9](#chapter05.html#page_107),
[123](#chapter06.html#page_123), [137](#chapter06.html#page_137),
[139](#chapter06.html#page_139), [143](#chapter06.html#page_143),
[146–7](#chapter06.html#page_146), [150](#chapter06.html#page_150)

Elburz Mountains [142](#chapter06.html#page_142)

Enlai, Zhou [42–3](#chapter02.html#page_42)

Erdogan, Recep Tayyib [146](#chapter06.html#page_146),
[148](#chapter06.html#page_148)

Eritrea [106](#chapter05.html#page_106), [107](#chapter05.html#page_107)

Estonia [8](#chapter01.html#page_8), [13](#chapter01.html#page_13),
[19–20](#chapter01.html#page_19), [23](#chapter01.html#page_23)

Ethiopia [107](#chapter05.html#page_107),
[108–9](#chapter05.html#page_108)

Eurasian Union [12](#chapter01.html#page_12)

Europe [xiv](#intro.html#page_xiv), [237](#conclu.html#page_237)

Africa and [102](#chapter05.html#page_102)

China and [33](#chapter02.html#page_33)

Russia and [6](#chapter01.html#page_6), [8](#chapter01.html#page_8),
[9–10](#chapter01.html#page_9), [15–16](#chapter01.html#page_15),
[23](#chapter01.html#page_23), [24–5](#chapter01.html#page_24)

Turkey and [145–6](#chapter06.html#page_145)

USA and [56](#chapter03.html#page_56), [61](#chapter03.html#page_61),
[64](#chapter03.html#page_64), [66](#chapter03.html#page_66),
[67](#chapter03.html#page_67)

*see also* European Union; Western Europe; **individual countries by
name**

European Union (EU) [7](#chapter01.html#page_7),
[13](#chapter01.html#page_13), [17](#chapter01.html#page_17),
[22](#chapter01.html#page_22), [24](#chapter01.html#page_24),
[66](#chapter03.html#page_66), [82](#chapter04.html#page_82),
[85](#chapter04.html#page_85), [86](#chapter04.html#page_86),
[87](#chapter04.html#page_87), [88–9](#chapter04.html#page_88),
[91](#chapter04.html#page_91), [92–3](#chapter04.html#page_92),
[145](#chapter06.html#page_145)

Eurozone [89–90](#chapter04.html#page_89)

**F**

Falkland Islands [216](#chapter09.html#page_216),
[218–19](#chapter09.html#page_218)

Fezzan [104](#chapter05.html#page_104)

Finland [23](#chapter01.html#page_23), [87](#chapter04.html#page_87),
[224](#chapter10.html#page_224), [230](#chapter10.html#page_230),
[234](#chapter10.html#page_234)

First World War [64](#chapter03.html#page_64),
[124](#chapter06.html#page_124), [128](#chapter06.html#page_128)

Florida [57](#chapter03.html#page_57), [60](#chapter03.html#page_60),
[238](#conclu.html#page_238)

Florida Straits [63](#chapter03.html#page_63)

France [79](#chapter04.html#page_79), [81](#chapter04.html#page_81),
[85](#chapter04.html#page_85), [92](#chapter04.html#page_92),
[111](#chapter05.html#page_111)

Germany and [87–9](#chapter04.html#page_87),
[93](#chapter04.html#page_93)

Middle East and [123–4](#chapter06.html#page_123),
[129–30](#chapter06.html#page_129), [131](#chapter06.html#page_131)

USA and [58–9](#chapter03.html#page_58), [65](#chapter03.html#page_65)

Franco, Francisco [82](#chapter04.html#page_82)

Franco-Prussian War [87](#chapter04.html#page_87)

Franklin, John [225–6](#chapter10.html#page_225)

Free Tibet movement [38](#chapter02.html#page_38)

**G**

Gagarin, Yuri [239](#conclu.html#page_239)

Gakkel Ridge [231](#chapter10.html#page_231)

Ganges River [158](#chapter07.html#page_158)

Gaza [139](#chapter06.html#page_139)

Georges-Picot, François [124](#chapter06.html#page_124)

Georgia [13](#chapter01.html#page_13), [18](#chapter01.html#page_18),
[19](#chapter01.html#page_19), [22](#chapter01.html#page_22),
[66](#chapter03.html#page_66), [93](#chapter04.html#page_93)

Georgia (USA) [57](#chapter03.html#page_57)

Georgia-Russian War (2008) [22](#chapter01.html#page_22),
[93](#chapter04.html#page_93)

Germany [79](#chapter04.html#page_79), [81](#chapter04.html#page_81),
[83–4](#chapter04.html#page_83), [85](#chapter04.html#page_85),
[234](#chapter10.html#page_234)

France and [87–9](#chapter04.html#page_87),
[93](#chapter04.html#page_93)

modern military [90–1](#chapter04.html#page_90)

Russia and [5](#chapter01.html#page_5), [6](#chapter01.html#page_6),
[14](#chapter01.html#page_14), [23](#chapter01.html#page_23),
[88](#chapter04.html#page_88), [90–1](#chapter04.html#page_90),
[93](#chapter04.html#page_93)

Gibraltar Straits [14](#chapter01.html#page_14)

GIUK gap [15](#chapter01.html#page_15), [92](#chapter04.html#page_92),
[233](#chapter10.html#page_233)

global warming [224](#chapter10.html#page_224),
[238](#conclu.html#page_238)

Gobi Desert [31](#chapter02.html#page_31), [36](#chapter02.html#page_36)

Gorbachev, Mikhail [6](#chapter01.html#page_6)

Grand Canal, China [33](#chapter02.html#page_33)

Grand Renaissance Dam [108–9](#chapter05.html#page_108)

Great Wall of China [33](#chapter02.html#page_33)

Great Zimbabwe [101](#chapter05.html#page_101)

Greece [23](#chapter01.html#page_23), [82–4](#chapter04.html#page_82),
[89](#chapter04.html#page_89), [146–7](#chapter06.html#page_146)

Greenland [25](#chapter01.html#page_25),
[224](#chapter10.html#page_224), [235](#chapter10.html#page_235)

Guam [63](#chapter03.html#page_63), [65](#chapter03.html#page_65)

Guatemala [204](#chapter09.html#page_204)

Gujarat [158](#chapter07.html#page_158)

Gulf of Mexico [57](#chapter03.html#page_57),
[59](#chapter03.html#page_59), [63](#chapter03.html#page_63),
[201](#chapter09.html#page_201), [206](#chapter09.html#page_206),
[238](#conclu.html#page_238)

Gulf Stream [78](#chapter04.html#page_78)

<span id="index.html#page_252"></span>Guyana
[204](#chapter09.html#page_204)

Gwadar [162](#chapter07.html#page_162), [176](#chapter07.html#page_176)

**H**

Hanbal, Ahmad ibn [125](#chapter06.html#page_125)

Hanbali Islam [125](#chapter06.html#page_125)

Hans Island [235](#chapter10.html#page_235)

Hashemites [129](#chapter06.html#page_129),
[136](#chapter06.html#page_136)

Hawaii [63](#chapter03.html#page_63)

Helmand Province [169](#chapter07.html#page_169)

Herodotus [107](#chapter05.html#page_107)

Hezbollah [130–1](#chapter06.html#page_130),
[132](#chapter06.html#page_132), [141](#chapter06.html#page_141),
[144](#chapter06.html#page_144)

Himalayas [x](#intro.html#page_x), [31](#chapter02.html#page_31),
[37](#chapter02.html#page_37), [157](#chapter07.html#page_157),
[172](#chapter07.html#page_172), [238](#conclu.html#page_238)

Hindu Kush [157](#chapter07.html#page_157)

Hindus [158](#chapter07.html#page_158), [159](#chapter07.html#page_159)

Hitler, Adolf [5](#chapter01.html#page_5)

Holy Roman Empire [87](#chapter04.html#page_87)

Hong Kong [35](#chapter02.html#page_35), [47](#chapter02.html#page_47)

Honshu [190](#chapter08.html#page_190)

Hu Jinatao [39](#chapter02.html#page_39)

Hudson, Henry [225](#chapter10.html#page_225)

Hungary [xi](#intro.html#page_xi), [13](#chapter01.html#page_13),
[23](#chapter01.html#page_23), [79](#chapter04.html#page_79)

Hussein, Saddam [126–7](#chapter06.html#page_126),
[144](#chapter06.html#page_144)

Hutu people [106](#chapter05.html#page_106)

**I**

Iberian Peninsula [79](#chapter04.html#page_79)

Iceland [65](#chapter03.html#page_65), [224](#chapter10.html#page_224),
[230](#chapter10.html#page_230), [233](#chapter10.html#page_233)

Imjin-gang River [185](#chapter08.html#page_185)

India [x](#intro.html#page_x)

Afghanistan and [165–6](#chapter07.html#page_165)

China and [37–8](#chapter02.html#page_37),
[41](#chapter02.html#page_41), [163](#chapter07.html#page_163),
[172–6](#chapter07.html#page_172), [238](#conclu.html#page_238)

climate and rivers [158](#chapter07.html#page_158)

cultural diversity [158](#chapter07.html#page_158)

economic growth [174–5](#chapter07.html#page_174)

energy resources [174](#chapter07.html#page_174),
[175](#chapter07.html#page_175)

extents and borders [157](#chapter07.html#page_157),
[165](#chapter07.html#page_165), [172](#chapter07.html#page_172)

internal conflict [174](#chapter07.html#page_174)

Kashmir [162](#chapter07.html#page_162),
[163](#chapter07.html#page_163), [164–5](#chapter07.html#page_164)

military forces [163–4](#chapter07.html#page_163),
[165](#chapter07.html#page_165), [175–6](#chapter07.html#page_175)

Pakistan and [xiv](#intro.html#page_xiv),
[156–7](#chapter07.html#page_156), [158–9](#chapter07.html#page_158),
[162](#chapter07.html#page_162), [163–5](#chapter07.html#page_163)

partition of [158–9](#chapter07.html#page_158)

USA and [175](#chapter07.html#page_175)

India-China War [163](#chapter07.html#page_163)

*Indian Defence Review* [156](#chapter07.html#page_156)

Indian Ocean [14](#chapter01.html#page_14),
[43–4](#chapter02.html#page_43), [48](#chapter02.html#page_48),
[49](#chapter02.html#page_49), [98](#chapter05.html#page_98),
[101](#chapter05.html#page_101), [162](#chapter07.html#page_162)

Indo-China [34](#chapter02.html#page_34),
[193](#chapter08.html#page_193)

Indonesia [48](#chapter02.html#page_48), [68](#chapter03.html#page_68),
[70](#chapter03.html#page_70)

Indus River [158](#chapter07.html#page_158),
[164](#chapter07.html#page_164)

Inner Mongolia [34](#chapter02.html#page_34),
[35](#chapter02.html#page_35), [36](#chapter02.html#page_36),
[40](#chapter02.html#page_40)

Interahamwe [106](#chapter05.html#page_106)

Iran [71](#chapter03.html#page_71), [123](#chapter06.html#page_123),
[132](#chapter06.html#page_132), [141–4](#chapter06.html#page_141),
[146](#chapter06.html#page_146), [151](#chapter06.html#page_151)

Iran-Iraq War [142](#chapter06.html#page_142)

Iraq [xv](#intro.html#page_xv), [72](#chapter03.html#page_72),
[123](#chapter06.html#page_123), [125–8](#chapter06.html#page_125),
[133](#chapter06.html#page_133), [134](#chapter06.html#page_134),
[142](#chapter06.html#page_142), [144](#chapter06.html#page_144),
[149](#chapter06.html#page_149), [150](#chapter06.html#page_150),
[151](#chapter06.html#page_151), [239](#conclu.html#page_239)

Iraqi-Syrian border [122](#chapter06.html#page_122)

Islam

militants/jihadists [71](#chapter03.html#page_71),
[72](#chapter03.html#page_72), [108](#chapter05.html#page_108),
[110–11](#chapter05.html#page_110), [132–6](#chapter06.html#page_132)

North Africa [99](#chapter05.html#page_99)

Xinjiang [40–1](#chapter02.html#page_40), [42](#chapter02.html#page_42)

*see also* India; Islamic State; Middle East; Pakistan; Shia tribes;
Sunni tribes

Islamic State [132–3](#chapter06.html#page_132),
[135](#chapter06.html#page_135)

Israel [71–2](#chapter03.html#page_71), [108](#chapter05.html#page_108),
[123](#chapter06.html#page_123), [136–41](#chapter06.html#page_136),
[143–4](#chapter06.html#page_143), [146–7](#chapter06.html#page_146)

Italy [23](#chapter01.html#page_23), [65](#chapter03.html#page_65),
[82–3](#chapter04.html#page_82)

Ivan the Great [7](#chapter01.html#page_7)

Ivan the Terrible [7–8](#chapter01.html#page_7)

**J**

Japan [xiv](#intro.html#page_xiv), [11](#chapter01.html#page_11),
[34](#chapter02.html#page_34), [45–6](#chapter02.html#page_45),
[49–50](#chapter02.html#page_49), [64](#chapter03.html#page_64),
[68](#chapter03.html#page_68), [70](#chapter03.html#page_70),
[239](#conclu.html#page_239)

Arctic and [230](#chapter10.html#page_230)

China and [34](#chapter02.html#page_34), [35](#chapter02.html#page_35),
[45–6](#chapter02.html#page_45), [189](#chapter08.html#page_189),
[190](#chapter08.html#page_190), [191](#chapter08.html#page_191),
[192](#chapter08.html#page_192), [194](#chapter08.html#page_194),
[195–6](#chapter08.html#page_195)

energy resources [192–3](#chapter08.html#page_192)

extents and population [190](#chapter08.html#page_190),
[191](#chapter08.html#page_191), [195](#chapter08.html#page_195),
[196](#chapter08.html#page_196)

India and [175](#chapter07.html#page_175)

Korea and [180](#chapter08.html#page_180),
[183–4](#chapter08.html#page_183), [186](#chapter08.html#page_186),
[187–8](#chapter08.html#page_187), [189](#chapter08.html#page_189),
[190](#chapter08.html#page_190), [192](#chapter08.html#page_192),
[196](#chapter08.html#page_196)

military forces [192](#chapter08.html#page_192),
[193–5](#chapter08.html#page_193)

Mongol invasion [191](#chapter08.html#page_191)

Russia and [190–1](#chapter08.html#page_190),
[192](#chapter08.html#page_192), [195](#chapter08.html#page_195)

Second World War [193](#chapter08.html#page_193),
[195](#chapter08.html#page_195)

space programme [239](#conclu.html#page_239)

USA and [34](#chapter02.html#page_34), [64](#chapter03.html#page_64),
[68](#chapter03.html#page_68), [193–4](#chapter08.html#page_193),
[196](#chapter08.html#page_196)

Jefferson, Thomas [59](#chapter03.html#page_59)

Jerusalem [138–9](#chapter06.html#page_138)

Jews *see* Israel

Jinnah [160](#chapter07.html#page_160)

Jordan [123](#chapter06.html#page_123),
[128–9](#chapter06.html#page_128), [136](#chapter06.html#page_136),
[137](#chapter06.html#page_137), [140](#chapter06.html#page_140)

**K**

Kagan, Robert [94](#chapter04.html#page_94)

Kaliningrad [93](#chapter04.html#page_93)

Kaplan, Robert [49](#chapter02.html#page_49),
[89](#chapter04.html#page_89)

Karakoram Range [37](#chapter02.html#page_37),
[157](#chapter07.html#page_157)

Kashmir [162](#chapter07.html#page_162),
[163](#chapter07.html#page_163), [164–5](#chapter07.html#page_164)

Kazakhstan [12](#chapter01.html#page_12), [40](#chapter02.html#page_40),
[41](#chapter02.html#page_41), [66](#chapter03.html#page_66)

Kazama, Shinji [226–7](#chapter10.html#page_226)

Kemal, Mustafa [145–6](#chapter06.html#page_145)

Kenya [107](#chapter05.html#page_107),
[112–13](#chapter05.html#page_112), [116](#chapter05.html#page_116)

Khartoum, Sudan [108](#chapter05.html#page_108)

Khrushchev, Nikita [15](#chapter01.html#page_15)

Kiev, Ukraine [7](#chapter01.html#page_7),
[13](#chapter01.html#page_13), [14](#chapter01.html#page_14)

Kim Jong-il [182–3](#chapter08.html#page_182)

Kissinger, Henry [86](#chapter04.html#page_86)

Klitschko, Vitaly [14](#chapter01.html#page_14)

Kohl, Helmut [94](#chapter04.html#page_94)

Korea [xiv](#intro.html#page_xiv), [180](#chapter08.html#page_180),
[182](#chapter08.html#page_182), [183–4](#chapter08.html#page_183)

China and [180–1](#chapter08.html#page_180),
[185](#chapter08.html#page_185), [188](#chapter08.html#page_188),
[189](#chapter08.html#page_189)

Japan and [180](#chapter08.html#page_180),
[183–4](#chapter08.html#page_183), [186](#chapter08.html#page_186),
[187–8](#chapter08.html#page_187), [189](#chapter08.html#page_189),
[190](#chapter08.html#page_190), [192](#chapter08.html#page_192),
[196](#chapter08.html#page_196)

Korean War [65](#chapter03.html#page_65),
[184–5](#chapter08.html#page_184), [188](#chapter08.html#page_188)

North Korea [68](#chapter03.html#page_68),
[180–3](#chapter08.html#page_180), [184–5](#chapter08.html#page_184),
[186–9](#chapter08.html#page_186), [196](#chapter08.html#page_196)

nuclear weapons [186](#chapter08.html#page_186),
[188](#chapter08.html#page_188)

<span id="index.html#page_253"></span>Russia and
[184](#chapter08.html#page_184), [188](#chapter08.html#page_188),
[189](#chapter08.html#page_189)

South Korea [68](#chapter03.html#page_68),
[180](#chapter08.html#page_180), [184–7](#chapter08.html#page_184),
[188](#chapter08.html#page_188), [189–90](#chapter08.html#page_189),
[195](#chapter08.html#page_195), [196](#chapter08.html#page_196)

USA and [180](#chapter08.html#page_180),
[181](#chapter08.html#page_181), [184–5](#chapter08.html#page_184),
[186](#chapter08.html#page_186), [188](#chapter08.html#page_188),
[190](#chapter08.html#page_190), [196](#chapter08.html#page_196)

Korean War (1950–3) [65](#chapter03.html#page_65),
[184–5](#chapter08.html#page_184), [188](#chapter08.html#page_188)

Kosovo [xi](#intro.html#page_xi), [86](#chapter04.html#page_86),
[90](#chapter04.html#page_90)

Kublai Khan [33](#chapter02.html#page_33)

Kunlun Range [39](#chapter02.html#page_39)

Kurds/Kurdistan [126–8](#chapter06.html#page_126),
[134](#chapter06.html#page_134)

Kuril Islands [195](#chapter08.html#page_195)

Kuwait [123](#chapter06.html#page_123)

Kyrgyzstan [12](#chapter01.html#page_12), [40](#chapter02.html#page_40),
[41](#chapter02.html#page_41)

**L**

Laos [37](#chapter02.html#page_37)

Latin America [xiv](#intro.html#page_xiv), [25](#chapter01.html#page_25)

agriculture [213–14](#chapter09.html#page_213)

China and [209–11](#chapter09.html#page_209),
[212](#chapter09.html#page_212), [216](#chapter09.html#page_216)

climate and terrain [201](#chapter09.html#page_201),
[202](#chapter09.html#page_202), [205](#chapter09.html#page_205),
[206](#chapter09.html#page_206)

colonialism [200–1](#chapter09.html#page_200),
[203](#chapter09.html#page_203)

drug trafficking [206–8](#chapter09.html#page_206)

energy resources [202](#chapter09.html#page_202),
[204](#chapter09.html#page_204), [209](#chapter09.html#page_209),
[217–18](#chapter09.html#page_217)

extents and borders [201–2](#chapter09.html#page_201).
[205](#chapter09.html#page_205)

internal conflicts [203–4](#chapter09.html#page_203),
[215–16](#chapter09.html#page_215)

size and population [200](#chapter09.html#page_200),
[201](#chapter09.html#page_201), [203](#chapter09.html#page_203),
[205](#chapter09.html#page_205), [206](#chapter09.html#page_206)

trading links [201](#chapter09.html#page_201),
[202](#chapter09.html#page_202), [209](#chapter09.html#page_209),
[211](#chapter09.html#page_211), [212](#chapter09.html#page_212),
[214](#chapter09.html#page_214), [216](#chapter09.html#page_216)

UNASUR [215](#chapter09.html#page_215)

USA and [60–2](#chapter03.html#page_60), [72](#chapter03.html#page_72),
[211–12](#chapter09.html#page_211), [216](#chapter09.html#page_216) (see
*also* Mexico)

*see also* **individual countries by name**

Latvia [8](#chapter01.html#page_8), [13](#chapter01.html#page_13),
[19](#chapter01.html#page_19), [23](#chapter01.html#page_23)

Lebanon [129–31](#chapter06.html#page_129),
[132](#chapter06.html#page_132), [140–1](#chapter06.html#page_140),
[144](#chapter06.html#page_144)

Leopold of Belgium, King [105](#chapter05.html#page_105)

Lhasa, Tibet [39](#chapter02.html#page_39),
[40](#chapter02.html#page_40)

Liberia [112](#chapter05.html#page_112)

Libya [90](#chapter04.html#page_90), [103–4](#chapter05.html#page_103),
[123](#chapter06.html#page_123), [149](#chapter06.html#page_149),
[150](#chapter06.html#page_150)

Lithuania [8](#chapter01.html#page_8), [13](#chapter01.html#page_13),
[19](#chapter01.html#page_19), [23](#chapter01.html#page_23),
[24](#chapter01.html#page_24)

Little Diomede Island [9](#chapter01.html#page_9)

Louisiana Purchase (1803) [59](#chapter03.html#page_59)

Luanda [114](#chapter05.html#page_114)

**M**

Macau [35](#chapter02.html#page_35)

Magna Carta (1215) [91](#chapter04.html#page_91)

Malaysia [48](#chapter02.html#page_48), [68](#chapter03.html#page_68),
[70](#chapter03.html#page_70)

Maldives [238](#conclu.html#page_238)

Mali Empire [101](#chapter05.html#page_101)

Manchuria [34](#chapter02.html#page_34), [36](#chapter02.html#page_36),
[40](#chapter02.html#page_40), [183](#chapter08.html#page_183),
[192](#chapter08.html#page_192)

Mao, Chairman [35](#chapter02.html#page_35)

Margvelashvili, Giorgi [22](#chapter01.html#page_22)

Marshall Plan [65](#chapter03.html#page_65)

Massachusetts [57](#chapter03.html#page_57)

Meckel, Klemens [192](#chapter08.html#page_192)

Mediterranean Sea [14](#chapter01.html#page_14),
[65](#chapter03.html#page_65), [81](#chapter04.html#page_81),
[83](#chapter04.html#page_83), [99](#chapter05.html#page_99),
[102](#chapter05.html#page_102), [147](#chapter06.html#page_147)

Mekong River [38](#chapter02.html#page_38)

Mercator maps [98](#chapter05.html#page_98),
[99](#chapter05.html#page_99)

Merkel, Angela [84](#chapter04.html#page_84)

Meseta Central [82](#chapter04.html#page_82)

Mexican War (1846–8) [61–2](#chapter03.html#page_61)

Mexico [60–2](#chapter03.html#page_60),
[205–7](#chapter09.html#page_205), [212](#chapter09.html#page_212),
[238](#conclu.html#page_238)

Middle East [xiv](#intro.html#page_xiv), [24](#chapter01.html#page_24),
[65](#chapter03.html#page_65), [71](#chapter03.html#page_71),
[102](#chapter05.html#page_102)

borders and extents [122–3](#chapter06.html#page_122),
[141–2](#chapter06.html#page_141)

division of land [123–4](#chapter06.html#page_123),
[125–6](#chapter06.html#page_125)

energy resources [123](#chapter06.html#page_123),
[134–5](#chapter06.html#page_134), [141–2](#chapter06.html#page_141),
[143–4](#chapter06.html#page_143)

internal conflicts [124–9](#chapter06.html#page_124),
[130–41](#chapter06.html#page_130), [142](#chapter06.html#page_142),
[150](#chapter06.html#page_150)

Israeli/Palestine conflict [136–40](#chapter06.html#page_136)

jihadists [132–6](#chapter06.html#page_132)

nuclear weapons [143–4](#chapter06.html#page_143)

population [127](#chapter06.html#page_127),
[129](#chapter06.html#page_129), [141](#chapter06.html#page_141),
[144](#chapter06.html#page_144)

prejudices [149–50](#chapter06.html#page_149)

reality of the ‘Arab Spring’ [148–9](#chapter06.html#page_148)

‘Sykes-Picot’ [123–4](#chapter06.html#page_123)

*see also* **individual countries by name**

Ming dynasty, Chinese [33](#chapter02.html#page_33)

Minneapolis [59](#chapter03.html#page_59)

Mischief Islands [48](#chapter02.html#page_48)

Mississippi Basin/River [57](#chapter03.html#page_57),
[58](#chapter03.html#page_58), [59](#chapter03.html#page_59)

Moldova (Bessarabia) [13](#chapter01.html#page_13),
[19](#chapter01.html#page_19), [20–2](#chapter01.html#page_20)

Mongol Empire [7](#chapter01.html#page_7),
[33](#chapter02.html#page_33), [142](#chapter06.html#page_142),
[183](#chapter08.html#page_183), [191](#chapter08.html#page_191)

Mongolia [10](#chapter01.html#page_10), [31](#chapter02.html#page_31),
[32](#chapter02.html#page_32), [35](#chapter02.html#page_35),
[36](#chapter02.html#page_36), [41](#chapter02.html#page_41)

Monroe Doctrine [61](#chapter03.html#page_61),
[211–12](#chapter09.html#page_211)

Montreux Convention (1936) [14](#chapter01.html#page_14)

Morales, Evo [204](#chapter09.html#page_204)

Mozambique [101](#chapter05.html#page_101)

Mubarak, Hosni [150](#chapter06.html#page_150)

Murmansk Brigades [232](#chapter10.html#page_232)

Musharraf, Pervez [167–8](#chapter07.html#page_167)

Muslim Brotherhood [131–2](#chapter06.html#page_131),
[146](#chapter06.html#page_146), [150](#chapter06.html#page_150)

Muslims *see* India; Islam; Middle East; Pakistan; Shia tribe; Sunni
tribe

**N**

Nagaland [174](#chapter07.html#page_174)

Namibia [100](#chapter05.html#page_100), [106](#chapter05.html#page_106)

Napoleon Bonaparte [5](#chapter01.html#page_5),
[60](#chapter03.html#page_60)

*National Geographic* [98](#chapter05.html#page_98)

NATO (North Atlantic Treaty Organization) [xi–xii](#intro.html#page_xi),
[6–7](#chapter01.html#page_6), [13](#chapter01.html#page_13),
[15](#chapter01.html#page_15), [17](#chapter01.html#page_17),
[18–19](#chapter01.html#page_18), [20](#chapter01.html#page_20),
[22](#chapter01.html#page_22), [65](#chapter03.html#page_65),
[67](#chapter03.html#page_67), [85–7](#chapter04.html#page_85),
[88](#chapter04.html#page_88), [91](#chapter04.html#page_91),
[92–3](#chapter04.html#page_92), [147](#chapter06.html#page_147),
[167](#chapter07.html#page_167), [168](#chapter07.html#page_168),
[170](#chapter07.html#page_170), [171](#chapter07.html#page_171),
[231](#chapter10.html#page_231), [233](#chapter10.html#page_233)

Nepal [157](#chapter07.html#page_157), [173](#chapter07.html#page_173)

Netherlands [92](#chapter04.html#page_92)

New Orleans [58–9](#chapter03.html#page_58),
[63](#chapter03.html#page_63)

New Zealand [65](#chapter03.html#page_65)

<span id="index.html#page_254"></span>Nicaragua Grand Canal
[209–11](#chapter09.html#page_209)

Niger River [101](#chapter05.html#page_101)

Nigeria [109–10](#chapter05.html#page_109),
[111](#chapter05.html#page_111)

Nile River [101](#chapter05.html#page_101),
[107](#chapter05.html#page_107)

Nixon, Richard [42–3](#chapter02.html#page_42),
[207](#chapter09.html#page_207)

North China Plain [31](#chapter02.html#page_31)

North European Plain [ix](#intro.html#page_ix),
[5](#chapter01.html#page_5), [6](#chapter01.html#page_6),
[13](#chapter01.html#page_13), [20](#chapter01.html#page_20),
[65](#chapter03.html#page_65), [81](#chapter04.html#page_81),
[85](#chapter04.html#page_85), [88](#chapter04.html#page_88),
[237](#conclu.html#page_237)

North Korea *see under* Korea

North Pole [225](#chapter10.html#page_225)

*see also* Arctic

North Sea [15](#chapter01.html#page_15), [81](#chapter04.html#page_81),
[88](#chapter04.html#page_88), [92](#chapter04.html#page_92)

Northwest Passage [225–6](#chapter10.html#page_225)

Norway [15](#chapter01.html#page_15), [65](#chapter03.html#page_65),
[224](#chapter10.html#page_224), [230](#chapter10.html#page_230),
[231](#chapter10.html#page_231), [234](#chapter10.html#page_234)

Nubian Desert [108](#chapter05.html#page_108)

**O**

Obama, Barrack [49–50](#chapter02.html#page_49),
[66](#chapter03.html#page_66), [175](#chapter07.html#page_175)

Oberdorfer, Don [184](#chapter08.html#page_184)

Ohio River [58](#chapter03.html#page_58)

Okinawa [46](#chapter02.html#page_46), [65](#chapter03.html#page_65),
[70](#chapter03.html#page_70), [193](#chapter08.html#page_193),
[195](#chapter08.html#page_195), [196](#chapter08.html#page_196)

Oman [123](#chapter06.html#page_123)

Ortega, Daniel [210](#chapter09.html#page_210)

Ottoman Empire [xi](#intro.html#page_xi), [17](#chapter01.html#page_17),
[80](#chapter04.html#page_80), [123–4](#chapter06.html#page_123),
[126](#chapter06.html#page_126)

Özal, Turgut [146](#chapter06.html#page_146)

**P**

Pacific Ocean [44–6](#chapter02.html#page_44),
[48](#chapter02.html#page_48), [57](#chapter03.html#page_57),
[60](#chapter03.html#page_60), [65](#chapter03.html#page_65),
[201](#chapter09.html#page_201)

Pakistan [37](#chapter02.html#page_37), [40](#chapter02.html#page_40),
[41](#chapter02.html#page_41), [49](#chapter02.html#page_49),
[143](#chapter06.html#page_143)

Afghanistan and [165–6](#chapter07.html#page_165),
[169](#chapter07.html#page_169), [170](#chapter07.html#page_170)

Baluchistan [162–3](#chapter07.html#page_162)

China and [162](#chapter07.html#page_162),
[176](#chapter07.html#page_176)

cultural diversity [158](#chapter07.html#page_158),
[160](#chapter07.html#page_160)

East and West division [159](#chapter07.html#page_159)

energy resources [162](#chapter07.html#page_162)

extents and borders [157](#chapter07.html#page_157),
[159](#chapter07.html#page_159), [165](#chapter07.html#page_165),
[166](#chapter07.html#page_166)

India and [xiv](#intro.html#page_xiv),
[156–7](#chapter07.html#page_156), [158–9](#chapter07.html#page_158),
[162](#chapter07.html#page_162), [163–5](#chapter07.html#page_163)

internal conflict [160–2](#chapter07.html#page_160),
[163](#chapter07.html#page_163), [171](#chapter07.html#page_171)

Kashmir and [162](#chapter07.html#page_162),
[163](#chapter07.html#page_163), [164–5](#chapter07.html#page_164)

military forces [156](#chapter07.html#page_156),
[157](#chapter07.html#page_157), [160](#chapter07.html#page_160),
[163–4](#chapter07.html#page_163), [165](#chapter07.html#page_165),
[168](#chapter07.html#page_168), [171](#chapter07.html#page_171)

partition from India [159–60](#chapter07.html#page_159)

size and population [156](#chapter07.html#page_156),
[160](#chapter07.html#page_160)

Taliban [166–7](#chapter07.html#page_166),
[168](#chapter07.html#page_168), [169](#chapter07.html#page_169),
[170](#chapter07.html#page_170), [171–2](#chapter07.html#page_171)

USA and [167–9](#chapter07.html#page_167),
[170](#chapter07.html#page_170), [171–2](#chapter07.html#page_171)

*see also* Bangladesh

Palestine [123](#chapter06.html#page_123),
[136–40](#chapter06.html#page_136)

Palin, Sarah [9](#chapter01.html#page_9)

Panama [209](#chapter09.html#page_209)

Panama Canal [63](#chapter03.html#page_63),
[72](#chapter03.html#page_72), [209](#chapter09.html#page_209),
[210](#chapter09.html#page_210)

Papoulias, Karolos [83–4](#chapter04.html#page_83)

Paraguay [217](#chapter09.html#page_217)

Parry, Edward [225](#chapter10.html#page_225)

Pashtuns [161–2](#chapter07.html#page_161),
[166](#chapter07.html#page_166), [171](#chapter07.html#page_171),
[172](#chapter07.html#page_172)

Pearl Harbor [193](#chapter08.html#page_193)

Persian Empire [144](#chapter06.html#page_144)

Peru [200](#chapter09.html#page_200), [201](#chapter09.html#page_201),
[202](#chapter09.html#page_202), [204](#chapter09.html#page_204),
[212](#chapter09.html#page_212)

Peshawar [166](#chapter07.html#page_166)

Peter the Great [8](#chapter01.html#page_8),
[11](#chapter01.html#page_11)

Philippines [48](#chapter02.html#page_48),
[63](#chapter03.html#page_63), [175](#chapter07.html#page_175),
[193](#chapter08.html#page_193)

Poland [5](#chapter01.html#page_5), [13](#chapter01.html#page_13),
[18](#chapter01.html#page_18), [20](#chapter01.html#page_20),
[23](#chapter01.html#page_23), [24](#chapter01.html#page_24),
[84–6](#chapter04.html#page_84)

Portugal [35](#chapter02.html#page_35), [79](#chapter04.html#page_79),
[81](#chapter04.html#page_81), [111](#chapter05.html#page_111),
[116](#chapter05.html#page_116), [203](#chapter09.html#page_203)

Powell, Colin [167–8](#chapter07.html#page_167)

Provisions of Oxford (1258) [91](#chapter04.html#page_91)

Puerto Rico [63](#chapter03.html#page_63)

Punjab [158](#chapter07.html#page_158), [161](#chapter07.html#page_161),
[165](#chapter07.html#page_165), [174](#chapter07.html#page_174)

Putin, Vladimir [ix](#intro.html#page_ix), [5](#chapter01.html#page_5),
[13](#chapter01.html#page_13), [14](#chapter01.html#page_14),
[15](#chapter01.html#page_15), [16–17](#chapter01.html#page_16),
[19](#chapter01.html#page_19), [24](#chapter01.html#page_24),
[66](#chapter03.html#page_66), [86](#chapter04.html#page_86),
[232](#chapter10.html#page_232)

Pyongyang [182](#chapter08.html#page_182),
[188](#chapter08.html#page_188)

Pyrenees Mountains [79](#chapter04.html#page_79),
[82](#chapter04.html#page_82)

Pytheas of Massilia [225](#chapter10.html#page_225)

**Q**

Qin dynasty, Chinese [33](#chapter02.html#page_33)

**R**

Radio Beijing [35](#chapter02.html#page_35)

Reid, John [169](#chapter07.html#page_169)

Republic of Congo [106](#chapter05.html#page_106)

Rhine River [79](#chapter04.html#page_79)

Rhône River [81](#chapter04.html#page_81)

Rio Grande [62](#chapter03.html#page_62)

Rocky Mountains [57](#chapter03.html#page_57)

Roman Empire [79](#chapter04.html#page_79)

Romania [13](#chapter01.html#page_13), [15](#chapter01.html#page_15),
[79](#chapter04.html#page_79), [86](#chapter04.html#page_86)

Roosevelt, Theodore [69](#chapter03.html#page_69),
[211–12](#chapter09.html#page_211)

Rousseff, Dilma [216](#chapter09.html#page_216)

Russia/Soviet Union (USSR) [ix](#intro.html#page_ix),
[xiii](#intro.html#page_xiii), [237](#conclu.html#page_237)

Afghanistan and [11](#chapter01.html#page_11),
[162](#chapter07.html#page_162), [166](#chapter07.html#page_166)

Angolan civil war [105](#chapter05.html#page_105),
[111](#chapter05.html#page_111), [112](#chapter05.html#page_112)

Arctic and [92](#chapter04.html#page_92),
[224](#chapter10.html#page_224), [229](#chapter10.html#page_229),
[230](#chapter10.html#page_230), [231–4](#chapter10.html#page_231),
[235](#chapter10.html#page_235)

Balkan countries and [86](#chapter04.html#page_86)

Baltic States and [8](#chapter01.html#page_8),
[18](#chapter01.html#page_18), [19–20](#chapter01.html#page_19),
[93](#chapter04.html#page_93) ( *see also* **individual countries by
name**)

China and [10](#chapter01.html#page_10), [25](#chapter01.html#page_25),
[34](#chapter02.html#page_34), [35](#chapter02.html#page_35),
[36](#chapter02.html#page_36), [41](#chapter02.html#page_41)

Empire established [8](#chapter01.html#page_8)

energy resources [17](#chapter01.html#page_17),
[23–5](#chapter01.html#page_23), [147](#chapter06.html#page_147)

extents and borders [9](#chapter01.html#page_9),
[11](#chapter01.html#page_11)

Georgia and [22](#chapter01.html#page_22), [93](#chapter04.html#page_93)

Germany and [5](#chapter01.html#page_5), [6](#chapter01.html#page_6),
[14](#chapter01.html#page_14), [23](#chapter01.html#page_23),
[88](#chapter04.html#page_88), [90–1](#chapter04.html#page_90),
[93](#chapter04.html#page_93)

invasions of [5–6](#chapter01.html#page_5), [7](#chapter01.html#page_7)

Ivan the Terrible [7–8](#chapter01.html#page_7)

Japan and [190–1](#chapter08.html#page_190),
[195](#chapter08.html#page_195)

Korea and [184](#chapter08.html#page_184),
[188](#chapter08.html#page_188), [189](#chapter08.html#page_189),
[192](#chapter08.html#page_192)

military forces [5](#chapter01.html#page_5),
[11](#chapter01.html#page_11), [12](#chapter01.html#page_12),
[13](#chapter01.html#page_13), [22](#chapter01.html#page_22),
[25](#chapter01.html#page_25), [34](#chapter02.html#page_34),
[93](#chapter04.html#page_93), [232–3](#chapter10.html#page_232)

Moldova and [21–2](#chapter01.html#page_21)

NATO and EU [6–7](#chapter01.html#page_6),
[13](#chapter01.html#page_13), [15](#chapter01.html#page_15),
[17](#chapter01.html#page_17), [18–19](#chapter01.html#page_18),
[20](#chapter01.html#page_20), [22](#chapter01.html#page_22)

<span id="index.html#page_255"></span>naval forces
[14–15](#chapter01.html#page_14), [92](#chapter04.html#page_92),
[147](#chapter06.html#page_147), [233](#chapter10.html#page_233)

Poland and [5](#chapter01.html#page_5), [13](#chapter01.html#page_13),
[20](#chapter01.html#page_20), [23](#chapter01.html#page_23),
[84–5](#chapter04.html#page_84)

ports and trade [8](#chapter01.html#page_8),
[11–12](#chapter01.html#page_11), [13](#chapter01.html#page_13),
[14](#chapter01.html#page_14), [15](#chapter01.html#page_15)

size and population [4](#chapter01.html#page_4),
[9](#chapter01.html#page_9), [25](#chapter01.html#page_25)

space programmes [239–40](#conclu.html#page_239)

Ukraine and [ix](#intro.html#page_ix), [8](#chapter01.html#page_8),
[13–18](#chapter01.html#page_13), [93](#chapter04.html#page_93)

USA and [9](#chapter01.html#page_9), [14](#chapter01.html#page_14),
[15–16](#chapter01.html#page_15), [18](#chapter01.html#page_18),
[25](#chapter01.html#page_25), [62](#chapter03.html#page_62),
[65](#chapter03.html#page_65), [66–7](#chapter03.html#page_66),
[69](#chapter03.html#page_69), [83](#chapter04.html#page_83),
[234–5](#chapter10.html#page_234)

Warsaw Pact [6](#chapter01.html#page_6), [7](#chapter01.html#page_7)

Western Europe and [84–7](#chapter04.html#page_84),
[93–4](#chapter04.html#page_93)

Russo-Japanese War (1904–5) [184](#chapter08.html#page_184),
[192](#chapter08.html#page_192)

Rwanda [106](#chapter05.html#page_106), [107](#chapter05.html#page_107),
[116](#chapter05.html#page_116), [117](#chapter05.html#page_117)

Ryukyu Islands [46](#chapter02.html#page_46),
[195](#chapter08.html#page_195)

**S**

Saakashvili, Mikheil [22](#chapter01.html#page_22)

Saba River [79](#chapter04.html#page_79)

Sahara Desert [98](#chapter05.html#page_98),
[99](#chapter05.html#page_99), [101](#chapter05.html#page_101),
[102](#chapter05.html#page_102)

Sahel region, Africa [99](#chapter05.html#page_99),
[102](#chapter05.html#page_102), [110–11](#chapter05.html#page_110),
[239](#conclu.html#page_239)

Salafi Islam [125](#chapter06.html#page_125),
[135](#chapter06.html#page_135)

San Martín, José de [203](#chapter09.html#page_203)

satellites [239–40](#conclu.html#page_239)

Saudi Arabia [111](#chapter05.html#page_111),
[123](#chapter06.html#page_123), [129](#chapter06.html#page_129),
[135](#chapter06.html#page_135), [143](#chapter06.html#page_143),
[144](#chapter06.html#page_144), [151](#chapter06.html#page_151)

Scandinavia [86](#chapter04.html#page_86)

Schäuble, Wolfgang [83](#chapter04.html#page_83)

Sea of Japan [45–6](#chapter02.html#page_45),
[189](#chapter08.html#page_189)

Second World War [34](#chapter02.html#page_34),
[64](#chapter03.html#page_64), [84](#chapter04.html#page_84),
[94](#chapter04.html#page_94), [137](#chapter06.html#page_137),
[193](#chapter08.html#page_193), [195](#chapter08.html#page_195)

Seine River [81](#chapter04.html#page_81)

Seminole Indian nation [60](#chapter03.html#page_60)

Serbia [xi–xii](#intro.html#page_xi), [23](#chapter01.html#page_23),
[79](#chapter04.html#page_79), [86](#chapter04.html#page_86)

Sevastopol [13](#chapter01.html#page_13), [14](#chapter01.html#page_14),
[15](#chapter01.html#page_15)

Seward, William [62](#chapter03.html#page_62)

Shang dynasty, Chinese [31](#chapter02.html#page_31)

Shanghai [33–4](#chapter02.html#page_33)

Shia tribes [124–6](#chapter06.html#page_124),
[130](#chapter06.html#page_130), [134–5](#chapter06.html#page_134),
[143](#chapter06.html#page_143), [144](#chapter06.html#page_144),
[161](#chapter07.html#page_161)

Siachen Glacier [163](#chapter07.html#page_163)

Siberia [4](#chapter01.html#page_4), [10](#chapter01.html#page_10),
[231](#chapter10.html#page_231)

Sierra Madres Mountains [206](#chapter09.html#page_206)

Sierra Nevada Mountains [57](#chapter03.html#page_57)

Sikhs [158](#chapter07.html#page_158), [159](#chapter07.html#page_159),
[174](#chapter07.html#page_174)

Sindhs [161](#chapter07.html#page_161)

Singapore [48](#chapter02.html#page_48), [68](#chapter03.html#page_68),
[70](#chapter03.html#page_70), [193](#chapter08.html#page_193)

Singh, Dr Amarjit [156](#chapter07.html#page_156)

Sino-Japanese War, First [192](#chapter08.html#page_192)

Six-Day War (1967) [138](#chapter06.html#page_138)

Skagerrak Strait [15](#chapter01.html#page_15),
[233](#chapter10.html#page_233)

slavery [102](#chapter05.html#page_102)

Slovakia [13](#chapter01.html#page_13), [23](#chapter01.html#page_23),
[79](#chapter04.html#page_79)

Slovenia [86](#chapter04.html#page_86)

South African Development Community (SADC)
[116](#chapter05.html#page_116)

South African National Defence Force [117](#chapter05.html#page_117)

South America *see* **Latin America; individual countries by name**

South China Sea [37](#chapter02.html#page_37),
[44](#chapter02.html#page_44), [45](#chapter02.html#page_45),
[48](#chapter02.html#page_48), [49](#chapter02.html#page_49),
[175](#chapter07.html#page_175)

South Korea *see under* Korea

South Ossetia [93](#chapter04.html#page_93)

Soviet Union (USSR) *see* Russia/Soviet Union (USSR)

space programmes [239–40](#conclu.html#page_239)

Spain [60](#chapter03.html#page_60), [63](#chapter03.html#page_63),
[79](#chapter04.html#page_79), [80–1](#chapter04.html#page_80),
[82](#chapter04.html#page_82), [203](#chapter09.html#page_203),
[219](#chapter09.html#page_219)

Spratly Islands [48](#chapter02.html#page_48)

Sri Lanka [49](#chapter02.html#page_49)

Stalin, Joseph [12](#chapter01.html#page_12),
[21](#chapter01.html#page_21)

Strait of Hormuz [143–4](#chapter06.html#page_143)

Strait of Malacca [48](#chapter02.html#page_48),
[49](#chapter02.html#page_49), [70](#chapter03.html#page_70),
[162](#chapter07.html#page_162), [176](#chapter07.html#page_176)

Sudan [107](#chapter05.html#page_107), [108](#chapter05.html#page_108),
[114](#chapter05.html#page_114)

Suez Canal [14](#chapter01.html#page_14), [99](#chapter05.html#page_99),
[108](#chapter05.html#page_108)

Suez Crisis (1956) [65](#chapter03.html#page_65)

Sui dynasty, Chinese [33](#chapter02.html#page_33)

Sunni tribes [124](#chapter06.html#page_124),
[125–6](#chapter06.html#page_125), [130](#chapter06.html#page_130),
[131–2](#chapter06.html#page_131), [133–5](#chapter06.html#page_133),
[144](#chapter06.html#page_144), [161](#chapter07.html#page_161)

Svalbard Islands [231](#chapter10.html#page_231)

Sweden [6](#chapter01.html#page_6), [86–7](#chapter04.html#page_86),
[224](#chapter10.html#page_224), [230](#chapter10.html#page_230),
[234](#chapter10.html#page_234)

Sykes, Mark [123–4](#chapter06.html#page_123)

Syria [xiii](#intro.html#page_xiii), [xv](#intro.html#page_xv),
[14](#chapter01.html#page_14), [67](#chapter03.html#page_67),
[123](#chapter06.html#page_123), [127–8](#chapter06.html#page_127),
[129](#chapter06.html#page_129), [130](#chapter06.html#page_130),
[131–3](#chapter06.html#page_131), [137](#chapter06.html#page_137),
[141](#chapter06.html#page_141), [150](#chapter06.html#page_150),
[239](#conclu.html#page_239)

**T**

Taiwan (Republic of China) [45](#chapter02.html#page_45),
[46–7](#chapter02.html#page_46), [48](#chapter02.html#page_48),
[70](#chapter03.html#page_70), [192](#chapter08.html#page_192),
[195](#chapter08.html#page_195)

Tajikistan [12](#chapter01.html#page_12), [37](#chapter02.html#page_37),
[40](#chapter02.html#page_40), [41](#chapter02.html#page_41)

Taliban [xii](#intro.html#page_xii), [166–7](#chapter07.html#page_166),
[168–72](#chapter07.html#page_168)

Tamil [158](#chapter07.html#page_158)

Tanzania [100](#chapter05.html#page_100),
[102](#chapter05.html#page_102), [105](#chapter05.html#page_105),
[107](#chapter05.html#page_107), [113](#chapter05.html#page_113),
[116](#chapter05.html#page_116)

Texas [61–2](#chapter03.html#page_61)

Thailand [68](#chapter03.html#page_68), [175](#chapter07.html#page_175)

Theroux, Paul [39](#chapter02.html#page_39)

Tibet [xv](#intro.html#page_xv), [32](#chapter02.html#page_32),
[35](#chapter02.html#page_35), [37](#chapter02.html#page_37),
[38–40](#chapter02.html#page_38), [42](#chapter02.html#page_42),
[163](#chapter07.html#page_163), [173](#chapter07.html#page_173),
[174](#chapter07.html#page_174)

Tibetan Plateau [31](#chapter02.html#page_31),
[38](#chapter02.html#page_38)

Transcontinental Treaty (1819) [60](#chapter03.html#page_60)

Transnistria, Moldova [21–2](#chapter01.html#page_21),
[93](#chapter04.html#page_93)

Treaty of Tordesillas [203](#chapter09.html#page_203)

Tripolitania [104](#chapter05.html#page_104)

Tunisia [100](#chapter05.html#page_100)

Turkey [14](#chapter01.html#page_14), [15](#chapter01.html#page_15),
[23](#chapter01.html#page_23), [24](#chapter01.html#page_24),
[69](#chapter03.html#page_69), [83](#chapter04.html#page_83),
[86](#chapter04.html#page_86), [143](#chapter06.html#page_143),
[144–8](#chapter06.html#page_144), [239](#conclu.html#page_239)

Turkmenistan [12](#chapter01.html#page_12),
[142](#chapter06.html#page_142)

Tutsi people [106](#chapter05.html#page_106)

**U**

Uganda [100](#chapter05.html#page_100), [106](#chapter05.html#page_106),
[107](#chapter05.html#page_107), [116](#chapter05.html#page_116),
[117](#chapter05.html#page_117)

Uighur people [41–2](#chapter02.html#page_41)

Ukraine [ix](#intro.html#page_ix), [8](#chapter01.html#page_8),
[13](#chapter01.html#page_13), [15–18](#chapter01.html#page_15),
[66](#chapter03.html#page_66), [90](#chapter04.html#page_90),
[93](#chapter04.html#page_93)

Umayyad Caliphate [158](#chapter07.html#page_158)

United Nations [107](#chapter05.html#page_107),
[137](#chapter06.html#page_137), [185](#chapter08.html#page_185),
[211](#chapter09.html#page_211)

Convention on the Law of the Sea [230](#chapter10.html#page_230),
[234](#chapter10.html#page_234)

Human Development Index [10](#chapter01.html#page_10)

Security Council [18](#chapter01.html#page_18),
[114](#chapter05.html#page_114), [215](#chapter09.html#page_215)

United States of America [xiv](#intro.html#page_xiv)

Africa and [72](#chapter03.html#page_72),
[111](#chapter05.html#page_111)

American Revolutionary War [57](#chapter03.html#page_57)

Angolan civil war [105](#chapter05.html#page_105)

Arctic and [224](#chapter10.html#page_224),
[230](#chapter10.html#page_230), [233–4](#chapter10.html#page_233)

Britain and [58](#chapter03.html#page_58),
[64](#chapter03.html#page_64), [219](#chapter09.html#page_219)

Burma and [49–50](#chapter02.html#page_49)

California Gold Rush [62](#chapter03.html#page_62)

Caribbean and [63](#chapter03.html#page_63)

China and [30](#chapter02.html#page_30), [44](#chapter02.html#page_44),
[46](#chapter02.html#page_46), [47](#chapter02.html#page_47),
[48–9](#chapter02.html#page_48), [67–70](#chapter03.html#page_67),
[185](#chapter08.html#page_185), [195](#chapter08.html#page_195)

Cuba and [63](#chapter03.html#page_63), [69](#chapter03.html#page_69),
[180](#chapter08.html#page_180), [238](#conclu.html#page_238)

Declaration of Independence (1776) [58](#chapter03.html#page_58)

Destroyers for Bases Agreement [64](#chapter03.html#page_64)

early settlers and explorers [57–9](#chapter03.html#page_57)

energy resources [24](#chapter01.html#page_24),
[62](#chapter03.html#page_62), [71](#chapter03.html#page_71),
[73](#chapter03.html#page_73), [111](#chapter05.html#page_111),
[150–1](#chapter06.html#page_150), [193](#chapter08.html#page_193),
[209](#chapter09.html#page_209)

extents and borders [56–63](#chapter03.html#page_56)

French territory [58–9](#chapter03.html#page_58)

Homestead Act [62](#chapter03.html#page_62)

India and [175](#chapter07.html#page_175)

Iran and [71](#chapter03.html#page_71)

Israel and [71–2](#chapter03.html#page_71)

Japan and [34](#chapter02.html#page_34), [64](#chapter03.html#page_64),
[68](#chapter03.html#page_68), [193–4](#chapter08.html#page_193),
[196](#chapter08.html#page_196)

Korea and [180](#chapter08.html#page_180),
[181](#chapter08.html#page_181), [184–5](#chapter08.html#page_184),
[186](#chapter08.html#page_186), [188](#chapter08.html#page_188),
[190](#chapter08.html#page_190), [196](#chapter08.html#page_196)

Latin America and [60–2](#chapter03.html#page_60),
[72](#chapter03.html#page_72), [211–12](#chapter09.html#page_211),
[216](#chapter09.html#page_216) (*see also under* Mexico)

Mexico and [60–2](#chapter03.html#page_60),
[205–8](#chapter09.html#page_205), [238](#conclu.html#page_238)

Middle East and [127](#chapter06.html#page_127),
[142](#chapter06.html#page_142), [144](#chapter06.html#page_144),
[150–1](#chapter06.html#page_150)

military forces [xii](#intro.html#page_xii), [xv](#intro.html#page_xv),
[7](#chapter01.html#page_7), [68–70](#chapter03.html#page_68),
[73](#chapter03.html#page_73) (*see also* NATO; Navy and naval bases)

Monroe Doctrine [61](#chapter03.html#page_61),
[211–12](#chapter09.html#page_211)

Native Americans [60](#chapter03.html#page_60)

Navy and naval bases [30](#chapter02.html#page_30),
[44](#chapter02.html#page_44), [46](#chapter02.html#page_46),
[63](#chapter03.html#page_63), [64–5](#chapter03.html#page_64),
[67](#chapter03.html#page_67), [68](#chapter03.html#page_68),
[70](#chapter03.html#page_70), [71](#chapter03.html#page_71),
[193](#chapter08.html#page_193), [196](#chapter08.html#page_196)

Pakistan and [167–9](#chapter07.html#page_167),
[170](#chapter07.html#page_170), [171–2](#chapter07.html#page_171)

Panama Canal [63](#chapter03.html#page_63),
[72](#chapter03.html#page_72)

Poland and [85](#chapter04.html#page_85)

Russia/Soviet Union and [9](#chapter01.html#page_9),
[14](#chapter01.html#page_14), [15–16](#chapter01.html#page_15),
[18](#chapter01.html#page_18), [25](#chapter01.html#page_25),
[62](#chapter03.html#page_62), [65](#chapter03.html#page_65),
[66–7](#chapter03.html#page_66), [69](#chapter03.html#page_69),
[83](#chapter04.html#page_83), [85](#chapter04.html#page_85),
[234–5](#chapter10.html#page_234)

Second World War [34](#chapter02.html#page_34),
[64](#chapter03.html#page_64), [193](#chapter08.html#page_193)

size and population [57](#chapter03.html#page_57),
[61](#chapter03.html#page_61), [73](#chapter03.html#page_73)

space programme [239–40](#conclu.html#page_239)

Spanish territory [60](#chapter03.html#page_60),
[63](#chapter03.html#page_63)

Taiwan and [46](#chapter02.html#page_46), [47](#chapter02.html#page_47),
[70](#chapter03.html#page_70)

trade links [59](#chapter03.html#page_59), [63](#chapter03.html#page_63)

Vietnam and [37](#chapter02.html#page_37),
[65–6](#chapter03.html#page_65)

War of Independence [58](#chapter03.html#page_58)

War on Terror/Afghanistan [166–8](#chapter07.html#page_166),
[169](#chapter07.html#page_169), [170](#chapter07.html#page_170),
[171–2](#chapter07.html#page_171)

*see also* NATO; **individual states by name**

Ural Mountains [4](#chapter01.html#page_4), [5](#chapter01.html#page_5),
[8](#chapter01.html#page_8), [9](#chapter01.html#page_9),
[20](#chapter01.html#page_20)

Uruguay [212](#chapter09.html#page_212), [217](#chapter09.html#page_217)

USS *Kitty Hawk* [30](#chapter02.html#page_30)

USSR *see* Russia/Soviet

Union Uzbekistan [12](#chapter01.html#page_12)

**V**

Vaca Muerta ‘Dead Cow’ [217](#chapter09.html#page_217),
[219](#chapter09.html#page_219)

Venezuela [25](#chapter01.html#page_25),
[202](#chapter09.html#page_202), [204](#chapter09.html#page_204),
[209](#chapter09.html#page_209), [211](#chapter09.html#page_211),
[212](#chapter09.html#page_212)

Vietnam [37](#chapter02.html#page_37), [48](#chapter02.html#page_48),
[66](#chapter03.html#page_66), [68](#chapter03.html#page_68),
[175](#chapter07.html#page_175)

von Bismarck, Otto [73](#chapter03.html#page_73),
[86](#chapter04.html#page_86)

**W**

Wang Jing [210](#chapter09.html#page_210)

Warsaw Pact [6](#chapter01.html#page_6), [7](#chapter01.html#page_7)

Washington, George [64](#chapter03.html#page_64)

West Bank [140](#chapter06.html#page_140)

Western Europe agriculture [78](#chapter04.html#page_78),
[81](#chapter04.html#page_81), [82](#chapter04.html#page_82)

climate [78–9](#chapter04.html#page_78), [81](#chapter04.html#page_81)

economic crash [83–4](#chapter04.html#page_83),
[89](#chapter04.html#page_89)

Euro currency [89–90](#chapter04.html#page_89)

industrialisation [79](#chapter04.html#page_79),
[80](#chapter04.html#page_80)

military forces [83](#chapter04.html#page_83),
[88](#chapter04.html#page_88), [90](#chapter04.html#page_90),
[92](#chapter04.html#page_92), [94](#chapter04.html#page_94)

multi-cultural nature of [79](#chapter04.html#page_79)

natural borders [79–80](#chapter04.html#page_79)

north/south divide [80–4](#chapter04.html#page_80)

population [78](#chapter04.html#page_78)

Russia and [84–7](#chapter04.html#page_84),
[93–4](#chapter04.html#page_93)

trading links [78](#chapter04.html#page_78),
[79](#chapter04.html#page_79), [80–1](#chapter04.html#page_80),
[82–3](#chapter04.html#page_82), [89](#chapter04.html#page_89),
[91](#chapter04.html#page_91)

*see also* European Union (EU); **individual countries by name**

**X**

Xinjiang [34](#chapter02.html#page_34), [39](#chapter02.html#page_39),
[40–2](#chapter02.html#page_40), [162](#chapter07.html#page_162)

**Y**

Yangtze River [31](#chapter02.html#page_31),
[33](#chapter02.html#page_33), [38](#chapter02.html#page_38)

Yanukovych, Viktor [13](#chapter01.html#page_13),
[90](#chapter04.html#page_90)

Yellow River [31](#chapter02.html#page_31),
[33](#chapter02.html#page_33), [38](#chapter02.html#page_38)

Yellow Sea [37](#chapter02.html#page_37)

Yemen [123](#chapter06.html#page_123), [135](#chapter06.html#page_135),
[150](#chapter06.html#page_150)

Yuan dynasty, Mongol [33](#chapter02.html#page_33)

Yugoslavia (Union of Southern Slavs) [86](#chapter04.html#page_86)

**Z**

Zagros Mountains [141](#chapter06.html#page_141)

Zambezi River [100–1](#chapter05.html#page_100)

Zambia [106](#chapter05.html#page_106), [112](#chapter05.html#page_112)

Zheng He [43–4](#chapter02.html#page_43)

Zhirinovsky, Vladimir [11](#chapter01.html#page_11)

<span id="copyright.html"></span>

 

 

 

<span id="copyright.html#page_iv"></span>First published 2015 by

Elliott and Thompson Limited

27 John Street

London WC1N 2BX

[www.eandtbooks.com](http://www.eandtbooks.com)

ePUB: 978-1-78396-142-9

MOBI: 978-1-78396-143-6

Copyright © Tim Marshall 2015

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in or introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any
form, or by any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording
or otherwise) without the prior written permission of the publisher. Any
person who does any unauthorised act in relation to this publication may
be liable to criminal prosecution and civil claims for damages.

A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.

Maps: JP Map Graphics Ltd

Cover design by [DavidWardle.co.uk](http://DavidWardle.co.uk)
